Gene	Syn	Protein	Function	Description	Comments	b#	
alr	None	alanine racemase, biosynthetic, PLP-binding	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Alanine	Alanine racemase, biosynthetic, PLP-binding	Alr has a covalently PLP-modified K34 residue N6-(pyridoxal phosphate)lysine.	b4053
modB	chlJ	molybdate ABC transporter permease; chlorate resistance protein	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Anions	Molybdate ABC transporter permease; chlorate resistance	Null	b0764
cysZ	None	sulfate transporter, sulfite inhibited	Putative transport; Transport of small molecules: Anions	Sulfate transporter, sulfite inhibited	CysZ is a sulfite-inhibited pH-dependent sulfate transporter that is specialized for sulfate import for cysteine synthesis (Zhang, 2014). cysZ mutants are defective in sulfate assimilation, thought to be due to a defect in sulfate transport (Britton, 1983; Parra, 1983; Aguilar-Barajas, 2011). The etoposide-induced protein 2.4 family (EI24, PF0726), formerly known as DUF540, is named after the eukaryotic EI24 protein induced by the cytotoxic drug etoposide; ei24 is a p53 response gene involved in growth suppression and apoptosis (Gu, 2000). CysZ is an inner membrane protein with the C-terminus in the cytoplasm (Daley, 2005). otherPDB (I. loihiensis): 3TX3.	b2413
dfp	coaBC	fused 4'-phosphopantothenoylcysteine decarboxylase/phosphopantothenoylcysteine synthetase, FMN-binding	Phenotype; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	Coenzyme A biosynthesis, bifunctional enzyme; phosphopantothenoylcysteine decarboxylase (N) and phosphopantothenoylcysteine synthase (C)	Dfp was originally identified as a flavoprotein affecting DNA synthesis and pantothenate metabolism. The N-terminal domain of Dfp catalyzes the decarboxylation of (R)-4'-phospho-N-pantothenoylcysteine to 4'-phosphopantetheine.	b3639
fruB	fpr, fruF	fused fructose-specific PTS enzymes: IIA component/HPr component	Enzyme; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	Multiphosphoryl transfer protein: fructose PTS EIIA and FPr; MTP-Fru; diphosphoryl transfer protein (DTP)	FruB has an N-terminal fructose-specific EIIA domain and a C-terminal HPr-like FPr (fructose-inducible HPr) domain. In the probable fructose-specific PTS kinase cascade, the autophosphorylated enzyme I (PtsI) His189-P transfers a phosphate to His299 in the HPr-like FPr domain of FruB; His299-P transfers a phosphate to His62 of the FruB EIIA domain; His62-P transfers its phosphate to Cys112 of the EIIB domain of FruA and from EIIB to fructose during sugar uptake. 3/70 FruB peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is not removed (Maillet, 2007).	b2169
dcuB	genF	C4-dicarboxylate transporter, anaerobic; DcuS co-sensor	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	C4-dicarboxylate transporter, anaerobic; DcuS co-sensor	DcuB is a bifunctional protein with both transporter and co-sensor functions; some mutations affect DcuRS-mediated transcriptional regulation but not transport and vice-versa (Kleefeld, 2009; Bauer, 2011). IT (Ion Transporter) superfamily (Prakash, 2003). ST(3) structural class based on hydropathy profile (Lolkema, 2003). DcuB is required for D-tartrate anaerobic transport (Kim, 2007).	b4123
hisM	None	histidine ABC transporter permease	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	Histidine ABC transporter permease	Null	b2307
zraS	hydH	sensory histidine kinase in two-component regulatory system with ZraR	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Fermentation	Two component sensor kinase for ZraP; responsive to Zn(2+) and Pb(2+); autoregulated; regulation of Hyd-3 activity is probably due to crosstalk of overexpressed protein	Null	b4003
icdC'	icd	pseudogene, isocitrate dehydrogenase C-terminal gene fragment	Null	Pseudogene, isocitrate dehydrogenase, e14 attachment site	icdC' encodes the C-terminal 54 amino acid fragment of icd created during e14 prophage insertion. The inntact homolog icdE is a hybrid protein and this is the original C-terminus of icd.	b4519
rhsE'	None	pseudogene, Rhs family	Null	Pseudogene, Rhs family protein with putative toxin domain	It has been suggested that all Rhs systems are involved in intercellular growth inhibition, suggesting that the Rhs proteins are secreted from E. coli and that the variable C-terminal domains are toxic to neighboring cells when secreted to the outside of the cell (Koskiniemi, 2013).	b1456
yaaA	None	peroxide resistance protein, lowers intracellular iron	Null	Peroxide resistance protein, lowers intracellular iron	Mutants of yaaA in an Hpx- background (katE katG ahpCF) grow poorly, have extensive DNA damage and are filamentous; these phenotypes are due to elevated unincorporated intracellular iron levels that are suppressible by iron chelators (Liu, 2011). Although previous microarray results demonstrated a 4-fold elevation of yaaA expression by hydrogen peroxide in an oxyR mutant, this activation could not be reproduced with LacZ fusions or real time PCR (Zheng, 2001; Liu, 2011). Low abundance protein. UPF0246 family.	b0006
cydC	mdrA, mdrH, surB, ycaB	glutathione/cysteine ABC transporter export permease/ATPase	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Other	Glutathione/cysteine ABC transporter permease/ATPase; exports glutathione and cysteine to the periplasm as required for cytochrome assembly	Glutathione transport is more efficient than cysteine transport (Pittman, 2005). Exogenous glutathione or cysteine rescues the swarming motility defect and benzylpenicillin hypersensitivity of cydDC mutants (Pittman, 2002; Pittman, 2005).	b0886
mepM	yebA	murein DD-endopeptidase, space-maker hydrolase, septation protein	Enzyme; Murein sacculus, peptidoglycan	Murein DD-endopeptidase, space-maker hydrolase, septation protein; ampicillin sensitivity	The probably membrane-anchored periplasmic protein MepM(YebA) is one of three D-alanine-meso-DAP specific murein DD-endopeptidases, including MepS(Spr) and MepH(YdhO), which are the long predicted space-maker hydrolases needed to cleave peptide cross-bridges in murein so that the murein sacculus can be elongated by murein synthases; MepM(YebA) can act on intact murein sacculi and soluble cross-linked muropeptide dimers; MepM(YebA) activity requires divalent cations, optimally Zn(2+); cloned mepM(yebA) complements an mepS(spr) deletion; an mepS(spr)-mepH(ydhO)-mepM(yebA) triple mutation is lethal and an mepS(spr)-mepM(yebA) double mutant fails to grow on rich media but grows on minimal media (Singh, 2012). MepM(YebA) is needed for normal septation; mepM(yebA) mutants are more resistant to ampicillin, have septal defects and alleviate the growth defects associated with amiC, ampD and other murein hydrolases (Babu, 2011). NlpD, YgeR, MepM(YebA) and EnvC are members of the M23 clan of predicted metallopeptidases that have C-terminal LytM domains; mutating all four LytM domain genes produces a strain with a severe filamentous phenotype, similar to an amiABC triple mutant, of over 20 times the normal cell length and more than 70 times the normal amount of septa/cell, from 0.5 to 36 septa/cell; also similar to the amiABC mutant, the nlpD-envC-mepM(yebA)-ygeR mutant has altered morphology and delayed onset of lysis after beta-lactam antibiotic treatment (Uehara, 2009). MepM(YebA) must be in the periplasm as that is where its substrate is, but SignalP does not indicate a signal peptide cleavage site; nonetheless there is a single predicted transmembrane segment at positions 21-40 that likely serves as a signal anchor after membrane translocation. The spr, yebA, and ydhO genes have been renamed as mepS, mepM, and mepH, respectively (M. Reddy, personal communication).	b1856
acrD	yffA	aminoglycoside/multidrug efflux system	Putative transport; Drug/analog sensitivity	Aminoglycoside efflux pump; RND-type transporter	An acrD mutation confers increased sensitivity to aminoglycosides. acrD is paralogous to acrB. EvgAS regulon.	b2470
rodZ	yfgA	MreB assembly cytoskeletal protein	Putative membrane; Not classified	Cytoskeletal protein required for MreB assembly; required for swarming phenotype; transmembrane protein	rodZ(yfgA) double mutants with yciB, yciM or yhcB could not be constructed indicating that they are synthetic lethal combinations (Niba, 2007).	b2516
garL	yhaF	alpha-dehydro-beta-deoxy-D-glucarate aldolase	Null	2-dehydro-3-deoxygalactarate aldolase; homohexameric	Null	b3126
ispB	cel, yhbD	octaprenyl diphosphate synthase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Menaquinone, ubiquinone	Octaprenyl diphosphate synthase, isoprenoid biosynthesis	Null	b3187
csrD	yhdA	targeting factor for csrBC sRNA degradation	Null	Targeting factor for csrBC sRNA degradation by RNase E; degenerate GGDEF/EAL protein; carbon flux regulator; indirectly affects CsrA function	In its c-di-GMP domains CsrD has HRSDF instead of GGDEF and ELM instead of EAL and does not appear to have either diguanylate cyclase or cyclic-di-GMP phosphodiesterase activities and the role of CsrD in csrB/C destabilization does not involve cyclic-di-GMP metabolism (Suzuki, 2006). There is a very low level of CsrD expression and CsrD may work at substoichiometric concentrations (Suzuki, 2006). False positive lipoprotein prediction, Cys not conserved.	b3252
cpxR	yiiA	response regulator in two-component regulatory system with CpxA	Putative regulator; Not classified	Response regulator, periplasmic stress response; CpxA is cognate sensor protein	Null	b3912
yjiA	None	metal-binding GTPase	Null	Metal-binding GTPase, function unknown; GTP-binding protein; may have role in zinc homeostasis	YjiA binds metals near its GTPase site, which may modulate its GTPase activity (Sydor, 2013). yjiA and yjiS are widely shared genes flanking the variable Immigration Control Region (ICR) restriction-modification cassettes of enterobacterial genomes (Sibley, 2004). Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004).	b4352
aceA	icl	isocitrate lyase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Glyoxylate bypass	Isocitrate lyase, acetate utilization, glyoxylate shunt; tetrameric	Null	b4015
aceB	mas	malate synthase A	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Glyoxylate bypass	Malate synthase A; glyoxylate shunt enzyme	Null	b4014
aceE	None	pyruvate dehydrogenase, decarboxylase component E1, thiamine triphosphate-binding	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Pyruvate dehydrogenase	Pyruvate dehydrogenase, decarboxylase component E1; acetate requirement	The pyruvate dehydrogenase holoenzyme is AceE(24)+AceF(24)+Lpd(12).	b0114
aceF	None	pyruvate dehydrogenase, dihydrolipoyltransacetylase component E2	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Pyruvate dehydrogenase	Pyruvate dehydrogenase, dihydrolipoamide acetyltransferase E2; acetate requirement	The crystal structure of AceF (PDB: 4N72) is derived from E. coli O157:H7 but is identical to the K-12 sequence (Wang, 2014). The pyruvate dehydrogenase holoenzyme is AceE(24)+AceF(24)+Lpd(12). HT_Cmplx3_Cyt: AceF+Lpd.	b0115
aceK	None	isocitrate dehydrogenase kinase/phosphatase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Glyoxylate bypass	Isocitrate dehydrogenase kinase/phosphatase	Null	b4016
ackA	None	acetate kinase A and propionate kinase 2	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Electron transport	Acetate kinase, produces acetyl phosphate; mutants are fluoroacetate resistant; creBC regulon; binds Zn(II)	The AckA N-terminus has been reported to be blocked (Fox, 1986). The AckA N-terminus has been reportedly determined by protein sequencing, but the actual sequence data was not provided so it is not known if the intitial Met is cleaved or not, therefore AckA is not in the Verified Set (Katayama, 2002). OtherPDB(S.typhimurium): 3SLC, 3SK3 (Chittori, 2012).	b2296
pflA	act	pyruvate formate-lyase 1-activating enzyme; [formate-C-acetyltransferase 1]-activating enzyme; PFL activase	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Pyruvate formate-lyase 1-activating enzyme; [formate-C-acetyltransferase 1]-activating enzyme; PFL activase	Radical SAM superfamily.	b0902
ada	None	fused DNA-binding transcriptional dual regulator/O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase	Enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase, transcription factor; inducible; DNA repair against methylating and alkylating agents; binds Zn(II)	The Ada N-terminal domain acts as a transcriptional activator of ada, alkA, alkB and aidB. Ogt, Ada-C and YbaZ are homologous.	b2213
add	None	adenosine deaminase	Enzyme; Salvage of nucleosides and nucleotides	Adenosine deaminase	Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004). An add mutation affects growth on deoxyadenosine as carbon source in purA purB mutant background. 17/286 Add peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is not removed (Maillet, 2007).	b1623
adhE	adhC, ana	fused acetaldehyde-CoA dehydrogenase/iron-dependent alcohol dehydrogenase/pyruvate-formate lyase deactivase	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Fermentation	Alcohol dehydrogenase, largely anaerobic; aerobic antioxidant; acetaldehyde-CoA dehydrogenase, CoA-linked; allyl alcohol resistance	The reported PFL deactivase activity of AdhE (Kessler, 1991, 1992) could not be reproduced (Nnyepi, 2007).	b1241
adk	dnaW, plsA	adenylate kinase	Enzyme; Purine ribonucleotide biosynthesis	Adenylate kinase; weak nucleoside diphosphate kinase activity; pleiotropic effects on glycerol-3-phosphate acyltransferase activity; monomeric	Null	b0474
agp	None	glucose-1-phosphatase/inositol phosphatase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	Periplasmic glucose-1-phosphatase, acidic; has inositol phosphatase activity	Requires DsbA for activity.	b1002
alaS	act, ala-act, lovB	alanyl-tRNA synthetase	Enzyme; Aminoacyl tRNA synthetases, tRNA modification	Alanine--tRNA ligase, autorepressor	alaS is an essential gene (Jasin, 1984). The alaS mutants in the Keio collection have been shown to harbor an intact copy of alaS in addition to the deletion allele (Yamamoto, 2009). AlaS binds to the alaS promoter region and autoregulates its own gene expression in response to the intracellular alanine concentration (Putney, 1981a).	b2697
aldA	ald	aldehyde dehydrogenase A, NAD-linked	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Fermentation	Aldehyde dehydrogenase, NAD-dependent; active on lactaldehyde, glycolaldehyde, and other aldehydes	Null	b1415
puuC	aldH	gamma-glutamyl-gamma-aminobutyraldehyde dehydrogenase; succinate semialdehyde dehydrogenase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Gamma-glutamyl-gamma-aminobutyraldehyde dehydrogenase; succinate semialdehyde dehydrogenase; putrescine utilization pathway	PatD and PuuC account for 55% and 30%, respectively, of the cellular gamma-aminobutyraldehyde dehydrogenase activity (Schneider, 2012). PuuC accounts for 75% of the cellular NAD-dependent succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase activity (Schneider, 2012).	b1300
alkB	aidD	oxidative demethylase of N1-methyladenine or N3-methylcytosine DNA lesions	Putative enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	Alkylated DNA repair enzyme; alpha-ketoglutarate- and Fe(II)-dependent dioxygenase; releases replication blocks by oxidative demethylation of 1-methyladenine and 3-methylcytosine residues in ssDNA and dsDNA	AlkB mutants are extremely sensitive to MMS. Also repairs alkylated mRNA and tRNA in vivo and in vitro, the first example of direct RNA repair. Repairs epsilonA and epsilonC. Ada regulon.	b2212
amn	None	AMP nucleosidase	Enzyme; Salvage of nucleosides and nucleotides	AMP nucleosidase	PhoB regulon (Baek, 2006).	b1982
ampC	ampA	penicillin-binding protein; beta-lactamase, intrinsically weak	Enzyme; Drug/analog sensitivity	Penicillin-binding protein; beta-lactamase, intrinsically weak; penicillin resistance; affects morphology	AmpC is a penicillin-binding protein (Henderson, 1997). AmpC has a false positive lipoprotein prediction. AmpC is a verified SPI substrate (Jaurin, 1981).	b4150
ampD	None	1,6-anhydro-N-acetylmuramyl-L-alanine amidase, Zn-dependent; murein amidase	Regulator; Not classified	1,6-anhydro-N-acetylmuramyl-L-alanine amidase, Zn-dependent; murein amidase	2/87 AmpD peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is not removed (Maillet, 2007).	b0110
ampE	None	ampicillin resistance inner membrane protein; putative signaling protein in beta-lactamase regulation	Regulator; Drug/analog sensitivity	Ampicillin resistance inner membrane protein; putative signaling protein in beta-lactamase regulation	Null	b0111
cysQ	amt, amtA	3'(2'),5'-bisphosphate nucleotidase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Sulfur metabolism	3'(2'),5'-bisphosphate nucleotidase; converts pAp to AMP; lithium- and calcium-inhbited; putative PAPS (adenosine 3'-phosphate 5'-phosphosulfate) 3'(2'),5'-bisphosphate nucleotidase	CysQ is a main target of lithium toxicity in vivo. CysQ (AmtA) was originally thought to be involved in ammonium transport. CysQ may be part of a futile sulfur cycle with APS kinase CysC. CysQ is also known as 3'-phosphoadenosine 5'-phosphate (pAp) phosphatase. 6/78 CysQ peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is not removed (Maillet, 2007).	b4214
osmE	anr	osmotically-inducible lipoprotein	Regulator; Global regulatory functions	Osmotically inducible lipoprotein, function unknown	osmE is also regulated by growth phase. Promoter overlaps divergent nadE promoter. The first 20 aa of osmE cosntitute a type II signal peptide. HT_Cmplx43_Mem: DcrB+MoaB+OsmE+Slp+YajG+YraP.	b1739
ansA	None	cytoplasmic L-asparaginase 1	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Amino acids	L-asparaginase 1, cytoplasmic, low affinity	AnsA is required for utilization of L-asparagine as the sole source of nitrogen (Del Casale, 1983).	b1767
ansB	None	periplasmic L-asparaginase 2	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Amino acids	L-asparaginase 2, periplasmic, high affinity	ansB is regulated by Crp and FNR. AnsB can provide an anaerobic electron acceptor and allows growth on asparagine and glycerol anaerobically (Yogitha, 2013).	b2957
apaG	corD(S.t.), temP	protein associated with Co2+ and Mg2+ efflux	Null	Expressed as part of complex ksgA operon, function unknown; Salmonella ortholog involved in Co2+ and Mg2+ efflux; upstream of apaH	Null	b0050
apaH	cfcB	diadenosine tetraphosphatase	Enzyme; Salvage of nucleosides and nucleotides	Dinucleoside tetraphosphatase, symmetrical; diadenosine tetraphosphatase; bis(5'-nucleosyl)-tetraphosphatase, symmetrical	Required for invasion of cultured mammalian cells by S. typhimurium. Stress response. Complex operon.	b0049
appA	None	phosphoanhydride phosphorylase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	Acid phosphatase, pH 2.5, exopolyphosphatase; phytase	EvgAS regulon. AppA requires DsbA for activity.	b0980
appY	None	global transcriptional activator; DLP12 prophage	Regulator; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions; Phage or Prophage Related	Global transcription regulator, AraC family, DLP12 prophage	The global transcriptional regulator AppY stimulates expression of the anaerobically-induced energy metabolism operons hyaA-F and cbdABX-appA (Brøndsted, 1996; Atlung, 1996; Atlung, 1997). appY expression is induced by phosphate starvation and stationary phase. AppY activates cbdABX-appA transcription as growth slows, and AppY either activates or repressses other genes during exponential or stationary phase.	b0564
apt	None	adenine phosphoribosyltransferase	Enzyme; Salvage of nucleosides and nucleotides	Adenine phosphoribosyltransferase; adenine salvage, AMP from PRPP + Ade	Null	b0469
araA	None	L-arabinose isomerase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	L-arabinose isomerase; first step in arabinose catabolism; converts L-arabinose to L-ribulose	Null	b0062
araB	None	L-ribulokinase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Ribulokinase	Null	b0063
araC	None	ara regulon transcriptional activator; autorepressor	Regulator; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Transcriptional activator for the ara regulon; autorepressor in the absence of arabinose co-activator	AraC activates transcrption for araE and the araBAD and araFGH operons; AraC transcriptional activator family prototype.	b0064
araD	None	L-ribulose-5-phosphate 4-epimerase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	L-ribulose-5-phosphate 4-epimerase	AraD is a masked class II aldolase.	b0061
araE	None	arabinose transporter	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	Low-affinity L-arabinose transport; L-arabinose proton symport	Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS).	b2841
araF	None	L-arabinose ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	L-arabinose ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein	Null	b1901
araG	None	L-arabinose ABC transporter ATPase	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	L-arabinose ABC transporter ATPase	Null	b1900
araH	None	L-arabinose ABC transporter permease	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	L-arabinose ABC transporter permease	Null	b4460
araJ	None	L-arabinose-inducible putative transporter, MFS family	Transport; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	L-arabinose-inducible MFS family transporter, function unknown; not involved in arabinose uptake or utilization	A mutation in araJ does not affect arabinose uptake or utilization and does not affect the kinetics of arabinose induction, implying it is not an arabinose exporter either; the AraJ transport substrate is unknown (Reeder, 1991). Ara regulon.	b0396
arcA	cpxC, dye, fexA, msp, seg, sfrA	response regulator in two-component regulatory system with ArcB or CpxA	Regulator; Global regulatory functions	Response regulator, represses aerobic genes during anaerobic growth; auto-activator; activates some anaerobic genes; phosphorylated by two-component sensor kinase ArcB; RpoS represssor	The phosphorylated aerobic respiration control response regulator ArcA is also a direct repressor of rpoS transcription, binding at the promoter region (Mika, 2005). The arcA promoter region binds ArcA and ArcA activates arcA exression (Federowicz, 2014).	b4401
arcB	None	aerobic respiration control sensor histidine protein kinase, cognate to two-component response regulators ArcA and RssB	Enzyme; Global regulatory functions	Aerobic respiration control sensor histidine protein kinase; phosphorylates response regulator proteins ArcA and RssB	The ArcAB two-component regulatory system represses aerobic genes and activates some anerobic genes under anaerobic growth conditions. ArcB has has one receiver domain and two transmitter domains facilitating a four-step phosphorelay to ArcA and RssB.	b3210
argA	Arg1, Arg2, argB	amino acid N-acetyltransferase and inactive acetylglutamate kinase	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Arginine	N-acetylglutamate synthase; first step in arginine biosynthesis; amino-acid acetyltransferase; L-glutamate N-acetyltransferase; growth on acetylornithine; feedback inhibited by L-arginine	Null	b2818
argB	None	acetylglutamate kinase	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Arginine	N-acetylglutamate kinase	Null	b3959
argC	Arg2, argH	N-acetyl-gamma-glutamylphosphate reductase, NAD(P)-binding	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Arginine	N-acetyl-gamma-glutamyl-phosphate reductase	4/125 ArgC peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is not removed (Maillet, 2007).	b3958
argD	alaB, Arg1, argG, dapC, dtu	bifunctional acetylornithine aminotransferase and succinyldiaminopimelate aminotransferase	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Arginine	Acetylornithine aminotransferase; succinyldiaminopimelate aminotransferase, PLP-dependent	OtherPDB(S. typhimurium): 2PB0,2PB2 (Rajaram, 2007). HT_Cmplx34_Cyt: ArgD+CbpA+PepT.	b3359
argF	Arg5, argD	ornithine carbamoyltransferase 2, chain F; CP4-6 prophage	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Arginine; Phage or Prophage Related	Ornithine carbamoyltransferase; ornithine transcarbamylase; OTCase; CP4-6 putative prophage remnant	argI and argF have same enzyme activity. ArgF and ArgI form both homotrimers and heterotrimers (Legrain, 1972).	b0273
argG	Arg6, argE	argininosuccinate synthetase	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Arginine	Argininosuccinate synthase	Null	b3172
argI	None	ornithine carbamoyltransferase 1	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Arginine	Ornithine carbamoyltransferase; ornithine transcarbamylase; OTCase	argI and argF have same enzyme activity. ArgF and ArgI form both homotrimers and heterotrimers (Legrain, 1972).	b4254
argR	Rarg, xerA	l-arginine-responsive arginine metabolism regulon transcriptional regulator	Regulator; Amino acid biosynthesis: Arginine	Repressor of Arg regulon; cer-mediated site-specific recombination in plasmid ColE1; hexameric	Null	b3237
argS	lov	arginyl-tRNA synthetase	Enzyme; Aminoacyl tRNA synthetases, tRNA modification	Arginine--tRNA ligase	Null	b1876
argT	None	lysine/arginine/ornithine transporter subunit	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	Lys-, Arg-, and Orn-binding protein, periplasmic	After four hours of Zn(II) stress, ArgT protein levels decreased (Easton, 2006).	b2310
aroA	None	5-enolpyruvylshikimate-3-phosphate synthetase	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Chorismate	5-enolpyruvyl shikimate-3-phosphate synthase; ESPS synthase; 3-phosphoshikimate-1-carboxyvinyltransferase	The N-terminus of AroA was sequenced in Duncan et al., FEBS Lett. 170:59-63 (1984) but this citation is not in Medline; the sequencing result is noted in pmid 3518706, which is cited in the Verified Set.	b0908
aroB	None	3-dehydroquinate synthase	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Chorismate	3-Dehydroquinate synthase	aroB is a multi-copy suppressor of a pdxB deletion (Kim, 2010).	b3389
aroC	None	chorismate synthase	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Chorismate	Chorismate synthase	Null	b2329
aroD	None	3-dehydroquinate dehydratase	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Chorismate	3-Dehydroquinate dehydratase	Null	b1693
aroE	None	dehydroshikimate reductase, NAD(P)-binding	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Chorismate	Shikimate 5-dehydrogenase	AroE is also called dehydroshikimate reductase. AroE is paralogous to YdiB. 	b3281
aroF	None	3-deoxy-D-arabino-heptulosonate-7-phosphate synthase, tyrosine-repressible	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Tyrosine	3-deoxy-D-arabino-heptulosonate 7-phosphate (DAHP) synthase; tyrosine repressible; TyrR regulon	The 40 N-terminal amino acids of AroF were also determined by Shultz et al., FEBS Lett. 131:108-110 (1981) but this citation in not in Medline so it is not included in the Verified Set references.	b2601
aroG	None	3-deoxy-D-arabino-heptulosonate-7-phosphate synthase, phenylalanine repressible	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Phenylalanine	3-deoxy-D-arabino-heptulosonate-7-phosphate (DAHP) synthase; phenylalanine repressible; TyrR regulon	The 40 N-terminal amino acids of AroG were also determined by Shultz et al., FEBS Lett. 131:108-110 (1981) but this citation in not in Medline so it is not included in the Verified Set references.	b0754
aroH	None	3-deoxy-D-arabino-heptulosonate-7-phosphate synthase, tryptophan repressible	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Tryptophan	3-deoxy-D-arabino-heptulosonate-7-phosphate (DAHP) synthase; tryptophan repressible	aroH is in the PurR regulon (Marbach, 2012). The 40 N-terminal amino acids of AroH were also determined by Shultz et al., FEBS Lett. 131:108-110 (1981) but this citation in not in Medline so it is not included in the Verified Set references.	b1704
aroK	None	shikimate kinase I	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Chorismate	Shikimate kinase I; alkali-inducible	Null	b3390
aroL	None	shikimate kinase II	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Chorismate	Shikimate kinase II	Null	b0388
aroM	None	AroM family protein	Null	Function unknown	aroM is downstream of aroL.	b0390
aroP	None	aromatic amino acid transporter	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	General aromatic amino acid transport permease	AroP imports phenylalanine, tyrosine, and tryptophan across the cytoplasmic membrane. APC superfamily. Tyr regulon.	b0112
ascB	sac	cryptic 6-phospho-beta-glucosidase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Phospho-beta-glucosidase; inducer unknown; expressed when repressor AscG is mutated	bglA, bglB and ascB are paralogs.	b2716
ascF	sac	cellobiose/arbutin/salicin-specific PTS enzymes, IIB and IC components	Enzyme; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	PTS system EIIBC enzyme, beta-glucoside phosphotransferase; paralogous to bglF; cryptic unless AscG is mutated	Null	b2715
ascG	sac	asc operon transcriptional repressor; prpBC operon repressor	Regulator; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Repressor of asc operon; inducer unknown; prpBC operon repressor	An alternative ascG ATG start codon that precedes the annotated start codon might be utilized to form a 337 aa primary AscG translation product.	b2714
asd	dap, hom	aspartate-semialdehyde dehydrogenase, NAD(P)-binding	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Lysine	Aspartate semialdehyde dehydrogenase	The asd-yhgN divergent genes promoter region binds FNR (Federowicz, 2014).	b3433
aslA	atsA, gppB	putative Ser-type periplasmic non-aryl sulfatase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Sulfur metabolism	Predicted periplasmic non-aryl sulfatase, Ser-type; possible periplasmic mucin-desulfating sulfatase	E. coli K-12 cells exhibit mucin-desulfating sulfatase activity but not arylsulfatase activity (Yamada, 1978; Jansen, 1999). It is not known if one or both of the predicted periplasmic sulfatases AslA and YdeN are responsible for the observed mucin-desulfating sulfatase activity, but it is possible. AslB is predicted to be the anaerobic sulfatase-maturating enzyme converting Ser136 to 3-oxoalanine in AslA. 3-oxoalanine is also known as Calpha-formylglycine (FGly). The first 24 aa of AslA are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b3801
aslB	atsB, gppB	putative AslA-specific sulfatase-maturating enzyme	Regulator; Not classified	Predicted AslA-specific anaerobic sulfatase-maturating enzyme; Radical SAM enzyme	AslB is predicted to be the anaerobic sulfatase-maturating enzyme (anSME) responsible for the conversion of Ser136 to Calpha-formylglycine (FGly), also known as 3-oxoalanine, in the predicted periplasmic sulfatase AslA (Berteau, 2006). E. coli K-12 cells exhibit mucin-desulfating sulfatase activity but not arylsulfatase activity (Jansen, 1999). anSMEs are also known as Radical SAM superfamily sulfatase-maturases. Rob regulon.	b3800
asnA	None	asparagine synthetase A	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Asparagine	Asparagine synthase A; aspartate-ammonia ligase	AsnA is related to class II aa-tRNA synthetases (Nakatsu, 1998). AsnA and AsnB are redundant; an asparagine auxotrophy requires that both genes be mutated. AsnA uses ammonia as the nitrogen source. Residues 199-203 of zwf encode a NNWDN peptide involved in MazF(ChpA) toxicity that is likely converted to NNWNN by AsnA since an asnA deletion prevents NNWNN activity (Kolodkin-Gal, 2007).	b3744
asnB	None	asparagine synthetase B	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Asparagine	Asparagine synthase B [glutamine-hydrolyzing]	AsnA and AsnB are redundant; an asparagine auxotrophy requires that both the asnA and the asnB genes be mutated. Although ammonia can be utilized by AsnB, glutamine is the preferred substrate.	b0674
asnC	None	transcriptional activator of asnA; autorepressor	Regulator; Amino acid biosynthesis: Asparagine	Regulatory gene for asnA, asnC, gidA, Lrp family	Feast/famine regulatory protein.	b3743
asnS	lcs, tss	asparaginyl tRNA synthetase	Enzyme; Aminoacyl tRNA synthetases, tRNA modification	Asparagine--tRNA ligase	asnS is in the PurR regulon (Marbach, 2012).	b0930
aspA	None	aspartate ammonia-lyase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	L-aspartate ammonia-lyase; L-aspartase	Tetrameric enzyme. Repressed by nitrate via NarXL mediated repression.	b4139
aspC	None	aspartate aminotransferase, PLP-dependent	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Aspartate	Aspartate aminotransferase, AspAT; kynurenine aminotransferase; glutamine transaminase K	Null	b0928
aspS	tls	aspartyl-tRNA synthetase	Enzyme; Aminoacyl tRNA synthetases, tRNA modification	Aspartate--tRNA ligase	Null	b1866
atpA	papA, uncA	F1 sector of membrane-bound ATP synthase, alpha subunit	Enzyme; ATP-proton motive force interconversion	ATP synthase subunit alpha, membrane-bound, F1 sector	Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004). HT_Cmplx10_Mem: AtpA+AtpD+AtpG. HT_Cmplx1_Cyt: AtpA+AtpD.	b3734
atpB	papD, uncB	F0 sector of membrane-bound ATP synthase, subunit a	Enzyme; ATP-proton motive force interconversion	ATP synthase subunit a, membrane-bound, F0 sector	Null	b3738
atpC	papG, uncC	F1 sector of membrane-bound ATP synthase, epsilon subunit	Enzyme; ATP-proton motive force interconversion	ATP synthase subunit epsilon, membrane-bound, F1 sector	Null	b3731
atpD	papB, uncD	F1 sector of membrane-bound ATP synthase, beta subunit	Enzyme; ATP-proton motive force interconversion	ATP synthase subunit beta, membrane-bound, F1 sector	Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004). HT_Cmplx10_Mem: AtpA+AtpD+AtpG. HT_Cmplx1_Cyt: AtpA+AtpD.	b3732
atpE	papH, uncE	F0 sector of membrane-bound ATP synthase, subunit c	Enzyme; ATP-proton motive force interconversion	ATP synthase subunit c, membrane-bound, F0 sector; DCCD-binding	Null	b3737
atpF	papF, uncF	F0 sector of membrane-bound ATP synthase, subunit b	Enzyme; ATP-proton motive force interconversion	ATP synthase subunit b, membrane-bound, F0 sector	Null	b3736
atpG	papC, uncG	F1 sector of membrane-bound ATP synthase, gamma subunit	Enzyme; ATP-proton motive force interconversion	ATP synthase subunit gamma, membrane-bound, F1 sector	HT_Cmplx10_Mem: AtpA+AtpD+AtpG.	b3733
atpH	papE, uncH	F1 sector of membrane-bound ATP synthase, delta subunit	Enzyme; ATP-proton motive force interconversion	ATP synthase subunit delta, membrane-bound, F1 sector	Null	b3735
atpI	uncI	ATP synthase, membrane-bound accessory factor	Enzyme; ATP-proton motive force interconversion	ATP synthase, membrane-bound accessory factor	AtpI is not required for ATP synthase activity and is not present in the ATP synthase complex, although atpI mutants have a lower growth yield indicating an accessory role in ATP synthase function, perhaps as a non-essential membrane assembly factor (von Meyenburg, 1982; Gay, 1984). atpI has numerous rare codons and is poorly expressed. atpI is contained within one of the 20 regions of extreme structure (RES15) probably representing a highly curved DNA segment (Pedersen, 2000).	b3739
avtA	None	valine-pyruvate aminotransferase; transaminase C; alanine-valine transaminase	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Alanine	Valine-pyruvate aminotransferase; transaminase C; alanine-valine transaminase	3/30 AvtA peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed (Maillet, 2007).	b3572
bcp	None	peroxiredoxin; thiol peroxidase, thioredoxin-dependent	Phenotype; Not classified	Peroxiredoxin, thioredoxin-dependent thiol peroxidase; peroxide hypersensitivity; Prx	Downregulated twofold by GSNO in defined medium (anaerobic).	b2480
betA	None	choline dehydrogenase, a flavoprotein	Enzyme; Osmotic adaptation	Choline dehydrogenase, oxygen-dependent; bet genes confer protection against osmotic stress by making the osmoprotectant glycine betaine from choline	The bet genes are induced by choline, oxygen, and osmotic stress. ArcA regulon.	b0311
betB	None	betaine aldehyde dehydrogenase, NAD-dependent	Enzyme; Osmotic adaptation	Betaine aldehyde dehydrogenase, NAD-dependent; bet genes confer protection against osmotic stress by making the osmoprotectant glycine betaine from choline; tetrameric	The bet genes are induced by choline, oxygen, and osmotic stress. ArcA regulon.	b0312
betI	None	choline-inducible betIBA-betT divergent operon transcriptional repressor	Putative regulator; Osmotic adaptation	Transcriptional repressor for the betIBA-betT divergent operon, choline-inducible	The bet genes confer protection against osmotic stress by making the osmoprotectant glycine betaine from choline. TetR family. ArcA regulon. BetI is bound to its operator in both repressed and induced cells. The bet genes are induced by choline, oxygen, and osmotic stress.	b0313
betT	None	choline transporter of high affinity	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Other	High-affinity choline transporter; BCCT family; bet genes confer protection against osmotic stress by making the osmoprotectant glycine betaine from choline	The bet genes are induced by choline, oxygen, and osmotic stress. ArcA regulon.	b0314
bfr	None	bacterioferritin, iron storage and detoxification protein	Carrier; Transport of small molecules: Cations	Bacterioferritin; negatively regulated by ryhB RNA as part of indirect positive regulation by Fur; 24-mer	Null	b3336
bglB	None	cryptic phospho-beta-glucosidase B	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Phospho-beta-glucosidase B; allows growth on arbutin or salicin when activated	bglB is part of the cryptic bglGFBH operon. The bgl operon promoter is silenced by H-NS, represssed by Fis and activated by CRP-cAMP. bglA, bglB and ascB are paralogs.	b3721
bglF	bglC, bglS	fused beta-glucoside-specific PTS enzymes: IIA component/IIB component/IIC component	Enzyme; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	PTS system EIIABC enzyme, beta-glucoside phosphotransferase; BglG kinase/dephosphorylase; membrane-bound protein; binds BglG	BglF is probably phosphorylated at His547 in the C-terminal EIIA domain by phospho-HPr (PtsH); His547 then transfers the phosphate to Cys24 in the N-terminal EIIB domain which then transfers the phosphate to BglG, inactivating it in the absence of the beta glucoside sugar, or to the sugar during transport. bglF is part of the cryptic bglGFBH operon. The bgl operon promoter is silenced by H-NS, represssed by Fis and activated by CRP-cAMP.	b3722
bglG	bglC, bglR, bglS	transcriptional antiterminator of the bgl operon	Regulator; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Transcription antiterminator for cryptic bglGFBH operon; RNA-binding protein; dimerization and activity modulated by phosphorylation state; binds kinase/dephosphorylase BglF	The non-phosphorylated BglG dimer binds to RNA and allows readthrough of transcription. BglG has an N-terminal RNA-binding domain followed by two PTS-regulation and dimerization (PRD) domains, PRD1 and PRD2, which contain the phosphorylated sites. BglG is activated by phospho-HPr(PtsH)-mediated phosphorylation and is deactivated by BglF-mediated phosphorylation at a second site; the inducing beta-glucoside sugar causes BglF to dephosphylate BglG at the second site, leading to cytoplasmic localization of BglG, BglG dimerization, and activation of BglG-mediated antitermination of the bgl operon (Amster-Choder, 1992; Görke, 1999). BglG is homologus to LicT of B. subtilis.	b3723
bioA	None	7,8-diaminopelargonic acid synthase, PLP-dependent	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Biotin	7,8-diaminopelargonic acid aminotransferase	7/66 BioA peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is not removed (Maillet, 2007).	b0774
bioB	None	biotin synthase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Biotin	Biotin synthase; dethiobiotin to biotin pathway; iron-sulfur enzyme	Radical SAM superfamily. BioB contains two distinct Fe-S cluster binding sites, one site accommodates a [2Fe-2S](2+) cluster with partial noncysteinyl ligation, the other site accommodates a [4Fe-4S](2+,+) cluster that binds S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) at a unique Fe site of the [4Fe-4S](2+) cluster and undergoes O(2)-induced degradation via a distinct type of [2Fe-2S](2+) cluster intermediate.	b0775
bioC	None	malonyl-ACP O-methyltransferase, SAM-dependent	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Biotin	Malonyl-ACP O-methyltransferase, SAM-dependent; biotin synthesis blocked prior to pimeloyl CoA formation	A previous suggestion that BioC may methylate malonyl-ACP instead of malonyl-CoA was confirmed using the BioC enzyme from B. cereus and E. coli malonyl-ACP in vitro because active native BioC cannot be purified; the B. cereus enyzme complements an E. coli bioC mutation thus validating the function of the E. coli BioC enzyme in vivo (Lin, 2012). BioC and BioH are required to synthesize pimeloyl-ACP, a biotin precursor, utilizing the enzymes of fatty acid synthesis to add acyl groups to malonyl-CoA in two cycles to form pimeloyl-ACP methyl ester; BioC may methylate malonyl-ACP instead of malonyl-CoA (Lin, 2010).	b0777
bioD	None	dethiobiotin synthetase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Biotin	Dethiobiotin synthase	False positive lipoprotein prediction, verified amino terminus, Met is cleaved. BioD is 50% identical to paralog YnfK.	b0778
bioF	None	8-amino-7-oxononanoate synthase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Biotin	7-keto-8-amino pelargonic acid synthase	The N-terminal methionine of overexpressed BioF is removed, as confirmed by protein sequencing, but the native RBS was not included in the pET cloning, so BioB is omitted from the Verified Set (Alexeev, 1998).	b0776
bioH	bioB	pimeloyl-ACP methyl ester carboxylesterase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Biotin	Pimeloyl-ACP methyl ester carboxylesterase; short acyl chain carboxylesterase, binds CoA; biotin synthesis blocked prior to pimeloyl CoA formation	BioC and BioH are required to synthesize pimeloyl-ACP, a biotin precursor, utilizing the enzymes of fatty acid synthesis to add acyl groups to malonyl-CoA in two cycles to form pimeloyl-ACP methyl ester, which is hydrolyzed by BioH (Lin, 2010). S. marcescens bioH complements E. coli bioH. The N-terminal methionine is not removed, as indicated by the intact mass of the overexpressed protein.	b3412
birA	bioR, dhbB	bifunctional biotin-[acetylCoA carboxylase] holoenzyme synthetase/ DNA-binding transcriptional repressor, bio-5'-AMP-binding	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Biotin	Bifunctional biotin protein ligase, biotin operon repressor; biotin-[acetyl-CoA carboxylase] holoenzyme synthase; monomeric	Biotinyl-5'-AMP is the co-repressor and is also synthesized by BirA (Cronan, 1988). BirA biotinylates AccB on K122. The biotin operon is regulated by the rate of protein biotination (Cronan, 1989).	b3973
bisC	None	biotin sulfoxide reductase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Biotin	Biotin sulfoxide and methionine (S) sulfoxide reductase; cytoplasmic	BisC is sufficient for growth on Met-S-SO. BisC is unable to act on protein bound Met-S-SO. The N-terminal 39 amino acids are required for activity and anchor BisC to the cytoplasmic side of the inner membrane.	b3551
bolA	None	stationary-phase morphogene, transcriptional repressor for mreB; also regulator for dacA, dacC, and ampC	Putative regulator; Murein sacculus, peptidoglycan	Stationary-phase morphogene, transcriptional repressor; predicted reductase; regulates mreB, dacA, dacC, and ampC transcription; shape determinant; FtsZ dependent; induced by AI-2 pheromone	BolA overexpression produces osmotically stable spherical cells. BolA can form a heterodimer in vitro with FeS-bound monothiol glutaredoxin Grx4 but this complex is much less efficient than the FeS-bound Grx4 homodimer in FeS cluster transfer to Fdx (Yeung, 2011). bolA and ibaG(yrbA) are paralogs. BolA and OsmC are distant homologs, although BolA does not have the conserved cysteines of OsmC; BolA is predicted to be a monothiol glutaredoxin-interacting reductase (Huynen, 2005). RpoS regulon.	b0435
btuB	bfe, cer, dcrC	vitamin B12/cobalamin outer membrane transporter	Membrane; Outer membrane constituents	Vitamin B12 outer membrane receptor; receptor for E colicins, phages BF23 and C1	BtuB translation is regulated by adenosylcobalamin binding directly to btuB mRNA which contains a vitamin B12-responsive riboswitch (Nou, 2000; Nahvi, 2002; Johnson, 2012). The btuB mutants in the Keio collection have been shown to harbor an intact copy of btuB in addition to the deletion allele (Yamamoto, 2009). btuB is a non-essential gene (Koster, 1991). btuB deletions in the Keio collection also disable the 5' end of the downstream essential murI gene due to an unusually large 56 bp gene overlap, explaining why the btuB Keio mutants are merodiploid (Aufrère, 1986; Zhou, 2012).	b3966
btuC	None	vitamin B12 ABC transporter permease	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Other	Vitamin B12 ABC transporter permease	Null	b1711
btuD	None	vitamin B12 ABC transporter ATPase	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Other	Vitamin B12 ABC transporter ATPase	Null	b1709
btuE	None	glutathione peroxidase	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Other	Glutathione peroxidase; non-specific peroxidase activity	BtuE uses GSH, TrxA or TrxC as reducing agents in vitro; lipid peroxides could be the physiologically-relevant substrates for BtuE (Arenas, 2010). BtuE is induced by oxidative stress (Arenas, 2010). BtuE may be periplasmic but has no signal peptide; a periplasmic location for BtuE also seems unlikely in light of its use of Trx and Grx cytoplasmic proteins as reducing agents. Glutathione peroxidase family. Non-essential for vitamin B12 transport.	b1710
btuR	cobA(S.t.)	cob(I)yrinic acid a,c-diamide adenosyltransferase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Cobalamin	Cobinamide adenosyltransferase	BtuR enzyme activity has been characterized in Salmonella (Suh, 1993).	b1270
cadA	ldcI	lysine decarboxylase, acid-inducible	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Amino acids	Lysine decarboxylase, inducible; decameric	ppGpp binds to and inhibits CadA(LdcI) in vitro and in vivo (Kanjee, 2011). Induction of the cadAB operon under acidic conditions and in the presence of lysine neutralized the extracellular environment and enables production of CO(2); production of cadaverine and aminopropylcadaverine instead of putrescine and spermidine also resulted. cadAB operon induction also generated a proton motive force. Lack of cadBA operon induction results in an increase in speF-potE operon expression. CadA(LdcI) is required for full pathogenicity of Salmonella and Vibrio. CadA(LdcI) and RavA ATPase form a complex.	b4131
cadB	None	putative lysine/cadaverine transporter	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	Lysine-cadaverine antiporter	Induction of the cadBA operon under acidic conditions and in the presence of lycine neutralized extracellualr environment and enabled production of CO(2); production of cadaverine and aminopropylcadaverine instead of putrescine and spermidine also resulted. cadAB operon induction also generates a proton motive force. Lack of cadBA opereon induction results in an increase in speF-potE operon expression.	b4132
cadC	None	cadBA operon transcriptional activator	Regulator; Degradation of small molecules: Amino acids	Transcriptional activator for cadBA, low external pH-, low oxygen-, excess lysine-responsive; homodimeric	cadC transcription is repressed by multicopy leuO. CadC is a membrane spanning protein with a TM helix predicted from 155 to 180. The C-terminal periplasmic domain senses external stimuli and the N-terminal domain activates transcription.	b4133
carA	arg, cap, pyrA	carbamoyl phosphate synthetase small subunit, glutamine amidotransferase	Enzyme; Pyrimidine ribonucleotide biosynthesis	Carbamoyl phosphate synthase, small subunit; glutamine-hydrolyzing, tetramer of heterodimers	Null	b0032
carB	cap, pyrA	carbamoyl-phosphate synthase large subunit	Enzyme; Pyrimidine ribonucleotide biosynthesis	Carbamoyl phosphate synthase, ammonia, large subunit; tetramer of heterodimers	Null	b0033
cca	None	fused tRNA nucleotidyl transferase/2'3'-cyclic phosphodiesterase/2'nucleotidase and phosphatase	Enzyme; Aminoacyl tRNA synthetases, tRNA modification	tRNA nucleotidyltransferase, repairs terminal CCA of tRNAs	The CCA C-terminal HD domain has Ni(2+)-dependent phosphatase activity toward pyrophosphate, canonical 5'-nucleoside tri- and diphosphates, NADP, and 2'-AMP. It also has metal-independent phosphodiesterase activity toward 2',3'-cAMP, -cGMP, and -cCMP (Yakunin, 2004).	b3056
cdd	None	cytidine/deoxycytidine deaminase	Enzyme; Salvage of nucleosides and nucleotides	Cytidine deaminase; 2-deoxycytidine deaminase; mutants are 5-fluorodeoxycytidine resistant; binds Zn(II)	Null	b2143
cdh	pnuE(S.t.), ushB(S.t.)	CDP-diacylglycerol phosphotidylhydrolase	Enzyme; Fatty acid and phosphatidic acid biosynthesis	CDP-diglyceride hydrolase; Salmonella ortholog has both UDP sugar hydrolase (UshB) and NAD pyrophosphatase (PnuE) activities	It is unclear if Cdh(E.c.) has UshB or PnuE activity. E. coli is UshB- and cloned cdh does not confer UshB activity, but protein expression is undetectable due to poor translation of cdh(ushB) mRNA	b3918
cdsA	None	CDP-diglyceride synthase	Enzyme; Fatty acid and phosphatidic acid biosynthesis	CDP-diglyceride synthase, integral membrane protein with eight transmembrane helices; also known as phosphatidate cytidylyltransferase	Null	b0175
chbB	celA	N,N'-diacetylchitobiose-specific enzyme IIB component of PTS	Enzyme; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	N,N'-diacetylchitobiose utilization, enzyme IIB(Chb) of the PTS transport system	The chb operon is induced by N,N'-diacetylchitobiose. The chb operon was previously thought to encode a cryptic cel operon for a cellobiose degradation system. The Cel+ phenotype is due to mutations making expression chitobiose-independent, but a fully induced operon did not support growth on cellobiose, implying a mutation altering the substrate specificity is needed; several candidate mutations were noted in Genbank, but not proven to alter the specificity of the system (Keyhani, 1997). In contrast, a later study claim that mutations making the operon expression high-level constitutive by chbR and nagC mutations are sufficient for the Cel+ phenotype and that no mutations altering substrate specificity are required (Kachroo, 2007). The chbBC intergenic region contains an RNA decoy (trap-mRNA) which is antisense to the chiX(micM) sRNA; induction of the chb operon leads to chiX(micM) degradation and consequently to chiP induction as chiX(micM) repression is relieved (Overgaard, 2009). In Salmonella, chiX(micM) is also inactivated by the chbBC intergenic region, which in Salmonella (and possibly in E. coli also) is processed by RNase E to a ~3000 bp fragment (Figuera-Bossi (2009).	b1738
chbC	celB	N,N'-diacetylchitobiose-specific enzyme IIC component of PTS	Enzyme; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	PTS Enzyme IIC(Chb) for N,N'-diacetylchitobiose utilization	The chb operon is induced by N,N'-diacetylchitobiose. The chb operon was previously thought to encode a cryptic cel operon for a cellobiose degradation system. The Cel+ phenotype is due to mutations making expression chitobiose-independent, but a fully induced operon did not support growth on cellobiose, implying a mutation altering the substrate specificity is needed; several candidate mutations were noted in Genbank, but not proven to alter the specificity of the system (Keyhani, 1997). In contrast, a later study claim that mutations making the operon expression high-level constitutive by chbR and nagC mutations are sufficient for the Cel+ phenotype and that no mutations altering substrate specificity are required (Kachroo, 2007). The chbBC intergenic region contains an RNA decoy (trap-mRNA) which is antisense to the chiX(micM) sRNA; induction of the chb operon leads to chiX(micM) degradation and consequently to chiP induction as chiX(micM) repression is relieved (Overgaard, 2009). In Salmonella, chiX(micM) is also inactivated by the chbBC intergenic region, which in Salmonella (and possibly in E. coli also) is processed by RNase E to a ~3000 bp fragment (Figuera-Bossi (2009).	b1737
chbA	celC	N,N'-diacetylchitobiose-specific enzyme IIA component of PTS	Enzyme; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	PTS Enzyme IIA(Chb), N,N'-diacetylchitobiose utilization; trimeric	The chb operon is induced by N,N'-diacetylchitobiose. The chb operon was previously thought to encode a cryptic cel operon for a cellobiose degradation system. The Cel+ phenotype is due to mutations making expression chitobiose-independent, but a fully induced operon did not support growth on cellobiose, implying a mutation altering the substrate specificity is needed; several candidate mutations were noted in Genbank, but not proven to alter the specificity of the system (Keyhani, 1997). In contrast, a later study claim that mutations making the operon expression high-level constitutive by chbR and nagC mutations are sufficient for the Cel+ phenotype and that no mutations altering substrate specificity are required (Kachroo, 2007). The overexpressed, but native sequence, ChbA N-terminus was protein sequenced and the methionine is not removed, but the native RBS was not used in a pET vector so ChbA is not in the Verified Set (Keyhani, 2000).	b1736
chbR	celD	repressor of chb operon for N,N'-diacetylchitobiose utilization	Regulator; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Repressor for chb operon, N,N'-diacetylchitobiose utilization	The Cel+ phenotype is due to mutations making expression chitobiose-independent, but a fully induced operon did not support growth on cellobiose, implying a mutation altering the substrate specificity is needed; several candidate mutations were noted in Genbank, but not proven to alter the specificity of the system (Keyhani, 1997). In contrast, a later study claim that mutations making the operon expression high-level constitutive by chbR and nagC mutations are sufficient for the Cel+ phenotype and that no mutations altering substrate specificity are required (Kachroo, 2007). ChbR has an N-terminal Cupin_2 domain (PF07883) and a C-terminal AraC-like HTH_18 DNA-binding domain (Pfam PF12833).	b1735
chbF	celF, ydjD	phospho-chitobiase; general 6-phospho-beta-glucosidase activity	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: N,N'-diacetylchitobiose	N,N'-diacetylchitobiose utilization, phospho-chitobiase; can hydrolyze a variety of phospho-beta-glucosides	The chb operon is induced by N,N'-diacetylchitobiose. The chb operon was previously thought to encode a cryptic cel operon for a cellobiose degradation system. The Cel+ phenotype is due to mutations making expression chitobiose-independent, but a fully induced operon did not support growth on cellobiose, implying a mutation altering the substrate specificity is needed; several candidate mutations were noted in Genbank, but not proven to alter the specificity of the system (Keyhani, 1997). In contrast, a later study claim that mutations making the operon expression high-level constitutive by chbR and nagC mutations are sufficient for the Cel+ phenotype and that no mutations altering substrate specificity are required (Kachroo, 2007).	b1734
creD	cet, refII	inner membrane protein	Putative membrane; Colicin-related functions	Inner membrane protein, function unknown	CreBC regulon. Overproduction of CreD was previously associated with colicin E2 tolerance, but has been shown to be not involved in colicin E2 tolerance (Cariss, 2010). CreD is the prototype for the CreD/Cet family of inner membrane proteins of unknown function (PF05981).	b4400
cheA	None	fused chemotactic sensory histidine kinase in two-component regulatory system with CheB and CheY: sensory histidine kinase/signal sensing protein	Enzyme; Chemotaxis and mobility	Histidine protein kinase sensor of chemotactic response; CheY is cognate response regulator; autophosphorylating	CheA is required for polar localization of CheZ. CheAS (CheA-short) is a short form of full-length CheA (also known as CheAL for CheA-long) translated using an internal start at codon 98. Fla regulon.	b1888
cheB	None	fused chemotaxis regulator: protein-glutamate methylesterase in two-component regulatory system with CheA	Enzyme; Chemotaxis and mobility	Chemotaxis MCP protein-glutamate methylesterase; reverses CheR methylation at specific MCP glutamates	otherPDB (S. typhimurium): 1CHD, 1A2O. N-terminal response regulator domain inhibits C-terminal methylesterase unless phosphorylated at D56 by CheA. Flagellar regulon.	b1883
cheR	cheX	chemotaxis regulator, protein-glutamate methyltransferase	Enzyme; Chemotaxis and mobility	Chemotaxis MCP protein methyltransferase, SAM-dependent; binds C-terminus of chemoreceptors; makes glutamate methyl esters	Overexpression causes filamentous biofilm formation. otherPDB (S .typhimurium): 1AF7, 1BC5. Flagellar regulon.	b1884
cheW	None	purine-binding chemotaxis protein	Regulator; Chemotaxis and mobility	Chemotaxis signal transducer; bridges CheA to chemoreceptors to regulate phophotransfer to CheY and CheB	Flagellar regulon.	b1887
cheY	None	chemotaxis regulator transmitting signal to flagellar motor component	Regulator; Chemotaxis and mobility	Response regulator for chemotactic signal transduction; single-domain response regulator lacking an output domain; CheA is the cognate sensor protein; autoacetylase	The proposed mechanism for optimum chemotaxis suggests alteration of side chain signaling state by rotation of Tyr106 side chain; this is presumably modulated by phosphorylation state of the molecule. A mutation resulting in a tyrosine to tryptophan substitution at position 106 results in a hyperactive phenotype, while a double mutation T87I/Y106W resulted in loss of activity. Substitutions at ILE95 affect FliM binding. CheY can be reversibly acetylated at lysine residues 91, 92, 109, 119, 122, and 126 by acetyl-CoA synthase (Acs) in vitro (Barak, 1992; Barak, 2004). CheY can autoacetylate lysines in its C-terminal region in vitro (Barak, 2006). A high level of lysine acetylation of CheY is detected in vivo, and both Acs-dependent, acetate-stimulated acetylation and Acs-independent acetylation occurs (Yan, 2008). In vivo Acs-dependent lysine acetylation of CheY is consistent with the chemotaxis defects observed in Acs mutants and CheY Lys92 mutants (Barak, 2001) Acs-independent acetylation of CheY could be due to autoacetylation or the activity of a second lysine acetyltransferase such as the lysine acetyltransferase Pka(YfiQ) that has been shown to acetylate Acs lysines in vivo in Salmonella. CobB can deacetylate CheY in vitro and in vivo, reducing FliM binding and chemotaxis (Li, 2010). cobB is a mutational phenotypic suppressor of a cheA cheZ double mutation (Li, 2010). Flagellar regulon.	b1882
cheZ	None	chemotaxis regulator, protein phosphatase for CheY	Regulator; Chemotaxis and mobility	CheY-P phosphatase	Polar localization is dependent on CheA-short. Flagellar regulon.	b1881
modC	chlD, narD	molybdate ABC transporter ATPase; chlorate resistance protein	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Anions	Molybdate ABC transporter ATPase; chlorate resistance	ModC mutants are unable to reduce selenate.	b0765
moeA	bisB, chlE, narE	molybdopterin molybdenumtransferase; molybdopterin biosynthesis protein	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Molybdopterin	Molybdopterin molybdenumtransferase; molybdopterin (MPT) synthesis; incorporation of molybdenum into MPT; chlorate resistance	Human gephyrin resembles a fused MoeA and Mog. MoeA is paralogous to YfaY. MoeA mutants are unable to reduce selenate.	b0827
moeB	chlN	molybdopterin synthase sulfurylase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Molybdopterin	Molybdopterin-synthase sulfurylase; adenylation of MoaD C-terminus; chlorate resistance; zinc-containing enyzyme	YnjE, IscS, MoaD and MoeB form a complex in vivo (Dahl, 2011).	b0826
cirA	cir, feuA	colicin IA outer membrane receptor and translocator; ferric iron-catecholate transporter	Membrane; Outer membrane constituents	Colicin IA outer membrane receptor and translocator; ferric iron-catecholate transporter	CirA transports ferric iron-catecholates into cells and the primary function of CirA may be to recapture the hydrolytic products of enterobactin, such as 2,3-dihydroxybenzoic acid and 2,3-dihydroxybenzoylserine (Nikaido, 1990). CirA mediates TonB-dependent translocation of Colicin IA into cells (Jakes, 2010). CirA is a member of the Outer Membrane Receptor (OMR) family of ligand-gated protein channels that utilizes the proton motive force (PMF) and the TonB-ExbB-ExbD complex for iron-siderophore, colicin and microcin uptake. The OMR family belongs to the Porin superfamily and deletions in OMR family proteins can restore a passive diffusion channel function typical of normal OM porins.	b2155
clpA	lopD	ATPase and specificity subunit of ClpA-ClpP ATP-dependent serine protease, chaperone activity	Enzyme; Degradation of proteins, peptides, glyco	ATPase subunit of ClpAP ATP-dependent protease; protease Ti; molecular chaperone	Null	b0882
clpB	htpM	protein disaggregation chaperone	Putative enzyme; Degradation of proteins, peptides, glyco	Bichaperone with DnaK for protein disaggregation; disaggregase; protein-dependent ATPase; role in de novo protein folding under mild stress conditions	ClpB and DnaK cooperate (with DnaJ and GrpE) in the bichaperone-mediated, ATP-dependent unfolding of protein aggregates (Zolkiewski, 1999; Goloubinoff, 1999). ClpB exists in two isoforms, long ClpB(alpha)[ClpB93] and short ClpB(beta3[ClpB79], which is initiated from an internal GUG start at codon 149; both starts have been verified by N-terminal protein sequencing (Squires, 1991; Pontis, 1991). The dual translation initiation sites for ClpB have been confirmed using site-directed mutagenesis (Park, 1993). The N-terminal domain, present only in the ClpB long form, is required for efficient binding to protein aggregates and fully effective chaperone function (Barnett, 2005; Chow, 2005). Coordinated expression of both long and short forms of ClpB is required for the protection from thermal killing; the ratio of short form to long form ClpB is 0.4 to 0.5 under a variety of stress conditions (Chow, 2005). ClpB is heat shock protein F84.1 (Squires, 1991). ClpB is regulated by RpoH (Kitagawa, 1991). clpB is required for growth below 8C, which is enabled by transgenic Oleispira antarctica Cpn10/60. HT_Cmplx30_Mem: ClpB+DnaK+InfB+RpsA.	b2592
clpP	lopP, wseA	proteolytic subunit of ClpA-ClpP and ClpX-ClpP ATP-dependent serine proteases	Enzyme; Degradation of proteins, peptides, glyco	Proteolytic subunit of ClpXP and ClpAP ATP-dependent proteases; protease Ti	ClpP can simultaneously bind ClpX and ClpA to form a heteromeric complex. Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004). ClpP is required for MazF-mediated cell death after either DNA damage or inhibition of translation (Amitai, 2009). The first 14 aa of ClpP are proteolytically processed in trans by another ClpP molecule (Maurizi, 1990).	b0437
clpX	lopC	ATPase and specificity subunit of ClpX-ClpP ATP-dependent serine protease	Enzyme; Degradation of proteins, peptides, glyco	ATPase subunit of ClpXP protease; ClpXP degrades ssrA-tagged proteins; molecular chaperone	Null	b0438
cpdB	None	2':3'-cyclic-nucleotide 2'-phosphodiesterase	Enzyme; Salvage of nucleosides and nucleotides	2',3'-cyclic nucleotide 2'-phosphodiesterase, periplasmic	Null	b4213
cpsB	manC, mni, rfbM	mannose-1-phosphate guanyltransferase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Sugar-nucleotide biosynthesis, conversions	Mannose 1-P guanyltransferase synthesis; extracellular capsule polysaccharide ccolanic acid biosynthesis	Null	b2049
cpsG	manB, rfbK	phosphomannomutase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	Phosphomannomutase isozyme; colanic acid biosynthesis synthesis	Null	b2048
cpxA	ecfB, eup, rssE, ssd	sensory histidine kinase in two-component regulatory system with CpxR	Putative regulator; Global regulatory functions	Histidine protein kinase, periplasmic stress sensor; inner membrane protein; CpxR is the two-component cognate response regulator; Kan-R, phage Q resistant; L-serine growth	Null	b3911
crp	cap, csm	cAMP-activated global transcription factor, mediator of catabolite repression	Regulator; Global regulatory functions	cAMP-activated global transcription factor; mediator of catabolite repression; CRP; CAP	Null	b3357
crr	gsr, iex, tgs, treD	glucose-specific enzyme IIA component of PTS	Enzyme; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	EIIA(Glc), phosphocarrier for glucose PTS transport; negative control of rpoS	Phosphorylation of Enzyme IIAGlc is necessary for direct translational control of rpoS. Formerly EIII(glc), EIIAGlc is also known as EIIACrr. Dephosphorylation of Enzyme IIAGlc causes inhibition of uptake of a number of non-PTS carbon sources, a process called inducer exclusion. PTS is the phosphoenolpyruvate:carbohydrate phosphotransferase system for the uptake of carbohydrates that are phosphorylated during transport. Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004).	b2417
cspA	None	RNA chaperone and antiterminator, cold-inducible 	Regulator; Adaptations, atypical conditions	Cold-inducible RNA chaperone and antiterminator; aids gene expression at low temperature; cold shock protein CS7.4; binds ssRNA and ssDNA	CspA is a transcription antiterminator (Bae, 2000). The cspABEG deletion strain BX04 is cold-sensitive for growth and forms filaments at 15C (Xia, 2001). A cspA deletion grows slow below 8C (as enabled by transgenic Oleispira antarctica Cpn10/60). CspA is similar to Y-box DNA binding proteins of eukaryotes. Mutant has increased aggregation. Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004).	b3556
cstA	dppG?, ybdC	carbon starvation protein involved in peptide utilization; APC peptide transporter family protein	Putative transport; Not classified	Predicted APC superfamily peptide transporter; carbon starvation protein involved in peptide utilization	cstA opp double mutants grow slower than opp single mutants with tryptone, but not casamino acids, as carbon source (Schultz, 1991). A dppG (originally called dpp) mutation involved in dipeptide transport was mapped near cstA and may be allelic to cstA, with the caveat that a cstA opp double mutant does not display the valyl dipeptide resistance phenotype observed for dpp mutants (Schultz, 1991). Paralogs cstA and yjiY are both in operons with paralogous small proteins of unknown function, ybdD and yjiX, respectively. CstA has an N-terminal CstA domain (PF02554) and a C-terminal CstA-associated DUF4161 domain (PF13722) of unknown function; the CstA domain is a member of the APC clan (CL0062) of APC (Amino acid-Polyamine-organoCation) superfamily transporters.	b0598
lnt	cutE	apolipoprotein N-acyltransferase	Enzyme; Transport of small molecules: Cations	Apolipoprotein N-acyltransferase; copper sensitivity	lnt is a conditionally essential gene: lnt can be deleted if LolACDE is overexpressed in an lpp deletion strain, producing lipoproteins without acyl chains (apolipoproteins); a triple mutant lacking all three L,D-transpeptidases linking Lpp to murein [ldtA(erfK),ldtB(ybiS),ldtC(ycfS)] is also permissive (Narita, 2011).	b0657
cvpA	dedE	colicin V production protein	Membrane; Colicin-related functions	Colicin V production protein	The physiological host function of CvpA is unknown. cvpA is the first gene in the purF operon and a cvpA polar insertion mutant requires adenine (Fath, 1989).	b2313
cyaA	cya	adenylate cyclase	Enzyme; Global regulatory functions	Adenylate cyclase	Polyamine modulon (Igarashi, 2006).	b3806
cybB	None	cytochrome b561	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Electron transport	Cytochrome b561	Null	b1418
cydA	None	cytochrome d terminal oxidase, subunit I	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Electron transport	Cytochrome d (bd-I) ubiquinol oxidase subunit 1; upregulated in biofilms and microaerobic conditions; aerobically repressed by H-NS; anaerobically repressed by FNR	H-NS, FNR and ArcA regulons. ArcA-P antagonizes H-NS repression of cydAB in response to limiting oxygen. Biofilm microarray result was validated with RT-PCR. HT_Cmplx29_Mem: CbdA+CydA.	b0733
cydB	None	cytochrome d terminal oxidase, subunit II	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Electron transport	Cytochrome d (bd-I) ubiquinol oxidase subunit 2; upregulated in biofilms and microaerobic conditions; aerobically repressed by H-NS; anaerobically repressed by FNR	FNR and ArcA regulons. ArcA-P antagonizes H-NS repression of cydAB in response to limiting oxygen.	b0734
cynS	cnt	cyanate aminohydrolase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	Cyanate aminohydrolase	Null	b0340
cynT	None	carbonic anhydrase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	Carbonic anhydrase, beta class	Null	b0339
cynX	None	putative cyanate transporter	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Anions	Putative transporter, function unknown, cyn operon	75% of the in vivo transcripts end at a terminator inside the cynX gene; although CynT and CynX wer readily detectble in mincells, CynX was barely detectable (Sung, 1988). Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS). A cynX mutant does not appear to be defective in cyanate sensitivity or utilization (Guilloton, 1993).	b0341
cyoA	None	cytochrome o ubiquinol oxidase subunit II	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Aerobic respiration	Cytochrome o oxidase subunit II, lipoprotein; also called cytochrome bo(3) ubiquinol oxidase subunit II	The first 24 aa of CyoA are a type II signal peptide. The first 25 aa and the last 200 aa of the mature CyoA protein are in the periplasm. Translocation of the N-terminal domain od CyoA requires YidC; translocation of the large C-terminal domain of CyoA requires both YidC and the Sec translocon, and is dependent upon prior translocation of the N-terminal CyoA domain.	b0432
cyoB	None	cytochrome o ubiquinol oxidase subunit I	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Aerobic respiration	Cytochrome o oxidase subunit I, quinone-binding domain; cytochrome bo(3) ubiquinol oxidase subunit I	Subunit I (CyoB) of cytochrome o(bo3) oxidase contains the high-affinity ubiquinone binding site QH; residues R71, D75, H98 and Q101 are implicated in quinone binding using site-directed mutagenesis; a low-affinity binding site QL is also present, not precisely located but probably near the QH site (MacMillan, 2011; Yap, 2010; Hellwig, 2002). Cytochrome bo undergoes redox-linked structural alterations.	b0431
cyoC	None	cytochrome o ubiquinol oxidase subunit III	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Aerobic respiration	Cytochrome o oxidase subunit III; cytochrome bo(3) ubiquinol oxidase subunit III	Null	b0430
cyoD	None	cytochrome o ubiquinol oxidase subunit IV	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Aerobic respiration	Cytochrome o oxidase subunit IV; cytochrome bo(3) ubiquinol oxidase subunit IV	Null	b0429
cyoE	None	protoheme IX farnesyltransferase	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Aerobic respiration	Cytochrome o oxidase protoheme IX farnesyltransferase subunit	Null	b0428
cysA	None	sulfate/thiosulfate transporter subunit	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Anions	Sulfate/thiosulfate ABC transporter ATPase subunit	CysA is part of the CysAWUP-Sbp ABC transporter, also known as CysAWTP. cysA mutations are chromate resistant.	b2422
cysB	None	N-acetylserine-responsive cysteine regulon transcriptional activator; autorepressor	Transport; Amino acid biosynthesis: Cysteine	Transcriptional activator for the Cys regulon; N-acetylserine induced; autorepressor	LysR family.	b1275
cysC	None	adenosine 5'-phosphosulfate kinase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Sulfur metabolism	Adenylylsulfate kinase, APS kinase	Null	b2750
cysD	None	sulfate adenylyltransferase, subunit 2	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Sulfur metabolism	Sulfate adenylyltransferase subunit 2	Null	b2752
cysE	None	serine acetyltransferase	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Cysteine	Serine acetyltransferase (SAT); first step in cysteine synthesis; feedback inhibited by cysteine; hexameric	CysE forms a bienzyme complex with the CysK cysteine synthase A. CysE contains 13 hexapeptide repeats. The cysX gene downstream of cysE is the reverse complement of trmL and is probably not a real gene (Tei, 1990).	b3607
cysG	None	fused siroheme synthase 1,3-dimethyluroporphyriongen III dehydrogenase and siroheme ferrochelatase/uroporphyrinogen methyltransferase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Heme, porphyrin	Siroheme synthase, multifunctional enzyme; has three activities: uroporphyrinogen III methyltransferase, SAM-dependent; precorrin-2 dehydrogenase; sirohydrochlorin ferrochelatase	YraL is homologous to the C-terminal methyltransferase domain of CysG. cysG is transcribed from the nirB operon and from cysG promoters.	b3368
cysH	None	phosphoadenosine phosphosulfate reductase; PAPS reductase, thioredoxin dependent	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Sulfur metabolism	Phosphoadenosine phosphosulfate reductase; PAPS reductase, thioredoxin dependent	CysH has a PP-loop superfamily domain.	b2762
cysI	None	sulfite reductase, beta subunit, NAD(P)-binding, heme-binding	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Sulfur metabolism	Sulfite reductase [NADPH] hemoprotein beta-component; has 4Fe-4S iron-sulfur center	Null	b2763
cysJ	None	sulfite reductase, alpha subunit, flavoprotein	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Sulfur metabolism	Sulfite reductase [NADPH] flavoprotein alpha-component; binds FMN and FAD	CysJ is a partner of the YcbX molybdoenzyme, probably functioning to provide the NADPH:flavin reductase activity needed for detoxification at the YcbX molybdocenter (Kozmin, 2010).	b2764
cysK	cysZ	cysteine synthase A, O-acetylserine sulfhydrolase A subunit	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Cysteine	Cysteine synthase A, O-acetylserine sulfhydrylase A; homodimeric; selenate, azaserine, chromate resistance; alkali-inducible, sulfate starvation-inducible protein SSI5; cysteine desulfhydrase	CysK forms a bienzyme complex with CysE.	b2414
cysM	None	cysteine synthase B (O-acetylserine sulfhydrolase B)	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Cysteine	Cysteine synthase B, O-acetylserine sulfhydrylase B	Null	b2421
cysN	None	sulfate adenylyltransferase, subunit 1	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Sulfur metabolism	Sulfate adenylyltransferase subunit 1; putative ATP sulfurylase GTPase subunit	ATP sulfurylase is also called ATP:sulfate adenylyltransferase.	b2751
cysP	None	thiosulfate-binding protein	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Anions	Thiosulfate-binding protein, periplasmic	CysP is part of the CysAWUP-Sbp ABC transporter, also known as CysAWTP. Sbp is the periplasmic binding protein for sulfate, but genetic evidence suggests that CysP can partially compensate for a loss of Sbp.	b2425
cysS	None	cysteinyl-tRNA synthetase	Enzyme; Aminoacyl tRNA synthetases, tRNA modification	Cysteine--tRNA ligase; binds Zn(II)	Null	b0526
cysU	cysT	sulfate/thiosulfate ABC transporter permease	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Anions	Sulfate/thiosulfate ABC transporter permease	CysU is part of the CysAWUP-Sbp ABC transporter, also known as CysAWTP. cysT is a tRNA gene but has also been used to describe the CysU gene. Although CysT is widely used to describe the CysU permease because it was used in the original transporter publications, we use CysU, not CysT, to describe this permease protein.	b2424
cysW	None	sulfate/thiosulfate ABC transporter permease	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Anions	Sulfate/thiosulfate ABC transporter permease	CysW is part of the CysAWUP-Sbp ABC transporter, also known as CysAWTP.	b2423
cytR	None	Anti-activator for CytR-CRP nucleoside utilization regulon	Regulator; Global regulatory functions	Anti-activator for nucleoside utilization regulon	CytR and CRP cooperate to regulate genes involved in nucleoside utiization; CytR binds DNA weakly by itself but CytR binding directly to CRP stabilizes CytR binding to DNA and blocks CRP-mediated activation although CRP remains bound to DNA; release of CytR by cytidine binding allows for re-activation of transcription by CRP-cAMP (Valentin-Hansen, 1996) The CytR-CRP complex is a dual regulation transcription factor complex that is able to activate some promoters rather than repress, depending on the DNA context (Rasmussen, 1996). cytR mutants show improved growth on uridine. Eight target genes (deoC, cdd, ppiA, tsx, nupC, nupG, udp, rpoH) and auto-regulation of cytR constitute the CytR regulon; a tenth gene encoding an inner membrane protein, ycdZ(nupT), is predicted to be regulated by CytR-CRP based on conserved CytR and CRP binding sites but there is no experimental evidence for either YcdZ function or regulation of ycdZ (Sernova, 2012).	b3934
dacA	pfv	D-alanyl-D-alanine carboxypeptidase (penicillin-binding protein 5)	Enzyme; Murein sacculus, peptidoglycan	D-alanine D-alanine carboxypeptidase PBP5, cell morphology; penicillin-binding protein 5; beta-lactamase activity	A dacA deletion suppresses ftsK (Ts). DacA-deficient cells have a branching growth pattern and biofilm defect.	b0632
dacB	None	D-alanyl-D-alanine carboxypeptidase	Enzyme; Murein sacculus, peptidoglycan	D-alanine D-alanine carboxypeptidase PBP4; penicillin-binding protein 4	False positive lipoprotein prediction, verified SPI substrate. Mutant has biofilm defect.	b3182
dacC	None	D-alanyl-D-alanine carboxypeptidase; penicillin-binding protein 6a	Enzyme; Murein sacculus, peptidoglycan	D-alanine D-alanine carboxypeptidase PBP6; penicillin-binding protein 6	DacC(PBP6) is a tail-anchored protein with strong hydrophobic interactions between the inner membrane and a C-terminal DacC region that is not integrated into the inner membrane, and thus DacC can be be considered to be a peripheral inner membrane protein largely located in the periplasm (van der Linden, 1992; Harris, 1997; Siligardi, 1997, Harris, 1998; Harris, 2002).	b0839
dam	None	DNA adenine methyltransferase	Enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	DNA-(adenine-N6)-methyltransferase, methylates GATC; role in repair and replication	Dam is a base flipping enzyme. GATC sites can be visualized as DpnI cut sites.	b3387
dapA	None	dihydrodipicolinate synthase	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Lysine	Dihydrodipicolinate synthase	DapA levels may be influenced by GroES and GroEL. A dapA mutant is not in the Keio collection; DAP auxotrophs require added DAP to grow and since no DAP was added during mutant construction, no auxotrophic mutants were recovered; dapA is not an essential gene (Baba, 2006).	b2478
dapB	None	dihydrodipicolinate reductase	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Lysine	Dihydrodipicolinate reductase	A dapB mutant is not in the Keio collection; DAP auxotrophs require added DAP to grow and since no DAP was added during mutant construction, no auxotrophic mutants were recovered; dapB is not an essential gene (Baba, 2006).	b0031
dapD	ssa	2,3,4,5-tetrahydropyridine-2-carboxylate N-succinyltransferase	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Lysine	2,3,4,5-tetrahydropyridine-2-carboxylate N-succinyltransferase; mutations suppress growth defects of strains lacking superoxide dismutase	A dapD mutant is not in the Keio collection; DAP auxotrophs require added DAP to grow and since no DAP was added during mutant construction, no auxotrophic mutants were recovered; dapD is not an essential gene (Baba, 2006). DapD contains hexapeptide repeats. Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004). HT_Cmplx35_Cyt: DapD+SpeB.	b0166
dapE	msgB	N-succinyl-diaminopimelate deacylase	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Lysine	N-succinyl-diaminopimelate desuccinylase, DAP/lysine biosynthesis, contains Zn(2+)/Co(2+)	A dapE mutant is not in the Keio collection; DAP auxotrophs require added DAP to grow and since no DAP was added during mutant construction, no auxotrophic mutants were recovered. dapE(msgB) is a multicopy suppressor of grpE(Ts). Salmonella DapE also has Zn(2+)/Mn(2+)-dependent Asp-X dipeptidase activity. 7/81 DapE peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed (Maillet, 2007).	b2472
dapF	None	diaminopimelate epimerase	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Lysine	Diaminopimelate epimerase	Dimerization of DapF is required for enzyme activity (Hor, 2013).	b3809
dbpA	rhlC	ATP-dependent RNA helicase, specific for 23S rRNA	Enzyme; RNA synthesis, modification, DNA transcription	ATP-dependent 3'-5' RNA helicase, specific for 23S rRNA	Despite earlier report that DbpA is an ATP-independent RNA helicase, DbpA has been shown to be an ATP-dependent RNA helicase (Diges, 2001).	b1343
dcm	mec	DNA cytosine methyltransferase	Enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	DNA cytosine methyltransferase; internal cytosine methylated	Null	b1961
dcp	None	dipeptidyl carboxypeptidase II	Enzyme; Degradation of proteins, peptides, glyco	Dipeptidyl carboxypeptidase II	Null	b1538
ddlA	None	D-alanine-D-alanine ligase A	Enzyme; Murein sacculus, peptidoglycan	D-alanine:D-alanine ligase A, ADP-forming	Null	b0381
ddlB	ddl	D-alanine:D-alanine ligase	Enzyme; Murein sacculus, peptidoglycan	D-alanine:D-alanine ligase B, ADP-forming	Null	b0092
deaD	csdA, mssB, rhlD	ATP-dependent RNA helicase	Enzyme; RNA synthesis, modification, DNA transcription	ATP-dependent RNA helicase, 50S ribosomal subunit biogenesis; translation factor W2; factor X; facilitates translation of mRNAs with 5' secondary structures; multicopy suppressor of rpsB(Ts) mutations	RNA-stimulated ATPase activity and ATP-dependent RNA helciase activities have been demonstrated in vitro for DeaD(CsdA) (Bizebard, 2004). Mechanism of DeaD 50S biogenesis differs from that for SrmB 50S biogenesis. DeaD stabilizes exposed mRNA, possibly by protecting or destabilizing secondary structure of RNase E sites. Cold shock-inducible; acid-inducible.	b3162
dedA	None	DedA family inner membrane protein	Null	DedA family inner membrane protein, function unknown	DedA superfamily proteins YqjA and YghB likely have redundant functions since only a double mutant has defects; DedA superfamily members yabI or yohD can complement the yqjA yghB double mutant when overproduced, but a dedA clone cannot complement (Thompkins, 2008). The E. coli K-12 DedA superfamily (SNARE associated Golgi protein/PF09335) has eight paralogs in two families, the COG0586 DedA/YghB family (including the DedA/YabI/YohD subfamily and the general envelope maintenance protein YghB/YqjA subfamily) and the YdjX family (including the COG0398 YdjX/YdjZ subfamily and the COG1238 YqaA subfamily) (Doerrler, 2013; K.E.R.).	b2317
accD	dedB, usg	acetyl-CoA carboxylase, beta (carboxyltransferase) subunit	Enzyme; Fatty acid and phosphatidic acid biosynthesis	Acetyl-CoA carboxylase, carboxyltransferase beta subunit	Acetyl-CoA carboxylase AccA(2)AccD(2) represses its own translation, mediated by the beta subunit (AccD) binding to the accA and accD mRNAs; translation repression is relieved by acetyl-CoA (Meades, 2010).	b2316
dedD	None	membrane-anchored periplasmic protein involved in septation	Putative membrane; Not classified	Membrane-anchored periplasmic protein involved in septation	DedD has a single N-terminal transmembrane domain and a C-terminal periplasmic SPOR domain. DedD localizes to the septal ring and dedD mutants are defective in cell division (Gerding, 2009; Arends, 2010).	b2314
deoA	TP, tpp, ttg	thymidine phosphorylase	Enzyme; Salvage of nucleosides and nucleotides	Thymidine phosphorylase; homodimeric	7/91 DeoA peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is not removed (Maillet, 2007).	b4382
deoB	drm, thyR, tlr	phosphopentomutase	Enzyme; Salvage of nucleosides and nucleotides	Phosphopentomutase; deoxyribouratase	Null	b4383
deoC	dra, thyR, tlr	2-deoxyribose-5-phosphate aldolase, NAD(P)-linked	Enzyme; Salvage of nucleosides and nucleotides	2-deoxy-D-ribose 5-phosphate aldolase (DERA); deoxyriboaldolase	DeoC binds selenium tightly even after denaturation, possibly as a perselenide to a cysteine residue such as the conserved Cys47, perhaps indicative of a role in selenium transport (Lacourciere, 2002). DeoC is a survival protein required for MazF-mediated survival of a small subpopulation after inhibition of translation (Amitai, 2009). Half of the native protein still retains the initial Met.	b4381
deoD	pup	purine nucleoside phosphorylase 1; nicotinamide 1-beta-D-riboside phosphorylase	Enzyme; Salvage of nucleosides and nucleotides	Purine nucleoside phosphorylase 1; PNP-I; nicotinamide 1-beta-D-riboside phosphorylase; hexameric	Purine nucleoside phosphorylase 1 (DeoD) also has nicotinamide 1-beta-D-riboside phosphorylase activity in vitro (Wielgus-Kutrowska, 1997).	b4384
deoR	nucR	deoxyribose-5-phosphate-inducible deoxyribose operon transcriptional repressor; repressor of nupG and tsx	Regulator; Salvage of nucleosides and nucleotides	Repressor for deo operon, nupG and tsx; deoxyribose-5-phosphate inducible	The deo operon transcriptional repressor DeoR is also a repressor of the nucleoside transport gene nupG and of the nucleoside porin gene tsx.	b0840
dgkA	None	diacylglycerol kinase	Enzyme; Fatty acid and phosphatidic acid biosynthesis	Diacylglycerol kinase	DgkA is an integral membrane protein.	b4042
dgt	optA	deoxyguanosine triphosphate triphosphohydrolase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Nucleotide hydrolysis	Deoxyguanosine 5'-triphosphate triphosphohydrolase; dGTPase	Null	b0160
dicA	ftsT	Qin prophage; putative regulator for DicB	Regulator; Cell division; Phage or Prophage Related	Transcriptional repressor for dicB, Qin prophage	PF01381 family.	b1570
dicB	ftsT	Qin prophage; cell division inhibition protein	Regulator; Cell division; Phage or Prophage Related	Control of cell division, activates MinC, Qin prophage	Overexpression causes filamentous biofilm formation.	b1575
dicC	ftsT	Qin prophage; DNA-binding transcriptional regulator for DicB	Regulator; Cell division; Phage or Prophage Related	Transcriptional repressor for dicB, Qin prophage	Null	b1569
flk	div, rflH	putative flagella assembly protein	Putative factor; Surface structures	Prevents premature secretion of FlgM; senses flagellar assembly stage	Flk was characterized in Salmonella. Flk is transcribed divergently from pdxB; their promoters overlap. C-terminal membrane anchor is required for function.	b2321
dksA	msmA	transcriptional regulator of rRNA transcription; DnaK suppressor protein	Phenotype; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	RNAP-binding protein modulating ppGpp and iNTP regulation; reduces open complex half-life on rRNA promoters; removes transcriptional roadblocks to replication	DksA regulates its own repression (Edwards, 2011; Chandrangsu, 2011). High copy dksA suppresses mukB and TS growth and filamentation of a dnaK mutant. dksA is also a multicopy suppressor of dnaJ, grpE and prc. dksA transcription is alkali-inducible. dksA mutations affect chromosomal supercoiling. Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004). HT_Cmplx24_Cyt: DksA+GreA. dksA and ybiI are paralogs. DksA is required for replication to continue after amino acid stavation by removing transcriptional roadblocks (Tehranchi, 2010).	b0145
dld	None	D-lactate dehydrogenase, FAD-binding, NADH independent	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Aerobic respiration	D-lactate dehydrogenase; vinylglycolate resistance, FAD enzyme	Null	b2133
dmsA	None	dimethyl sulfoxide reductase, anaerobic, subunit A	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	DMSO reductase subunit A, anaerobic, periplasmic	Verified Tat substrate: DmsA has a Tat/Sec (Class II) 45 aa signal peptide (Tullman-Ercek, 2007). Bound DmsB is co-exported.	b0894
dmsB	None	dimethyl sulfoxide reductase, anaerobic, subunit B	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	DMSO reductase subunit B; apparent Fe-S binding subunit; anaerobic	DmsB is co-exported bound to Tat substrate DmsA. 	b0895
dmsC	None	dimethyl sulfoxide reductase, anaerobic, subunit C	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	DMSO reductase subunit C, periplasmic; has a membrane bound anchor	The glutamate residue (E87) is important for menaquinol binding. 	b0896
dnaA	hsm-2	chromosomal replication initiator protein DnaA, DNA-binding transcriptional dual regulator	Regulator; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	DNA synthesis initiator and global transcription regulator; binds DNA at DnaA boxes, binds cardiolipin and other acidic phospholipids, binds ATP	DnaA-ATP is the active form; DnaA-ADP is inactive; switching between the two forms modulates initiation activity. Acidic phospholipids release bound ADP, reactivating DnaA by allowing ATP to rebind. Null mutations in seqA, yccV or rpoN suppress dna46(Ts). Increases in DnaA levels reduce Fis oriC primary binding thus allowing DnaA to bind, this may play a role in the dynamics of prereplication complexes. Collapsed replication forks (primarily within 10 map units of oriC) are a result of the level of initiation induced by elevated dnaA expression. Hda-ADP is the monomeric active form for promoting clamp-mediated DNA-ATP hydrolysis (Su'etsugu, 2008). 2/43 DnaA peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed (Maillet, 2007).	b3702
dnaB	groP, grpA, grpD	replicative DNA helicase	Factor; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	Replicative DNA helicase; DNA-dependent ATPase involved in DNA synthesis; binds DNA contrahelicase termination protein Tus at Ter sites; possibly involved in DNA recombination	The dnaB gene is essential.	b4052
dnaC	dnaD	DNA biosynthesis protein	Enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	DNA biosynthesis, helicase DnaB loader; dual ATP/ADP switch protein	Null	b4361
dnaE	polC, sdgC	DNA polymerase III alpha subunit	Enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	DNA polymerase III, alpha subunit; suppressor of dnaG-Ts	Has a PHP domin, like YcdX.	b0184
dnaG	dnaP, parB, sdgA	DNA primase	Enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	Primase for DNA replication; primer synthesis for leading- and lagging-strand synthesis; binds Zn(II)	dnaG is an essential gene as evidenced by the analysis of conditional lethal and amber mutations (Carl, 1970; Marinus, 1970; Weschler, 1971; Gross, 1972; Nakamura, 1984; Murakami, 1985; Katayama, 1989). The dnaG mutants in the Keio collection have been shown to harbor an intact copy of dnaG in addition to the deletion allele (Yamamoto, 2009). The tsaD-rpsUdnaGrpoD divergent operon promoter region binds ArcA and rpsU-dnaG-rpoD operon expression is activated by ArcA (Federowicz, 2014).	b3066
dnaJ	faa, groP, grpC	chaperone Hsp40, DnaK co-chaperone	Factor; Chaperones	DnaK co-chaperone HSP40; DNA-binding protein; stress-related DNA biosynthesis, responsive to heat shock; binds Zn(II)	DnaK and DnaJ both bind to the same target peptide, forming a ternary complex. DjlA, CbpA, and DnaJ are all DNA-binding proteins, with the membrane bound cytosolic protein DjlA having high affinity for DNA (Gur, 2005).	b0015
dnaK	groPAB, groPC, groPF, grpC, grpF, seg	chaperone Hsp70, with co-chaperone DnaJ	Factor; Chaperones	Hsp70 molecular chaperone, heat-inducible; bichaperone with ClpB for protein disaggregation	ClpB and DnaK cooperate (with DnaJ and GrpE) in the bichaperone-mediated, ATP-dependent unfolding of protein aggregates (Zolkiewski, 1999; Goloubinoff, 1999). DnaK mediates ATP-regulated binding and release of polypeptide substrates. Binds Zn(II). DnaJ is a co-chaperone for DnaK. Role in the initiation of DNA replication. DnaK has secondary amide peptide bond cis-trans isomerase (APIase) activity. A dnaK mutant is inviable above 42C, or below 8C (as enabled by transgenic Oleispira antarctica Cpn10/60). A tig dnaK double deletion is a synthetic lethal combination at 30 degrees C, however, no lethal effects are observed at 23 degrees C; overproduction of GroEL/GroES at 30 degrees C suppresses synthetic lethality. dnaK, hscA, hscC and yegD are paralogs. After four hours of Zn(II) stress, protein levels increased (Easton, 2006). DnaK lysines K70, K245, K246, K304, K359, K502, K528 and K587 can be modified to N6-succinyllysine (Zhang, 2011). DnaK lysines K109, K245, K304, K421, K556 and K577 can be modified to N6-acetyllysine (Yu, 2008; Zhang, 2009). HT_Cmplx22_Cyt: DnaK+GrpE+GyrA+RpsA. HT_Cmplx30_Mem: ClpB+DnaK+InfB+RpsA.	b0014
dnaN	None	DNA polymerase III, beta subunit	Enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	DNA polymerase III sliding clamp beta subunit; required for high processivity; required for regulatory inactivation of DnaA	Null	b3701
dnaQ	mutD	DNA polymerase III epsilon subunit	Enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	DNA polymerase III epsilon subunit; streptomycin, azaserine resistant; 3' to 5' proofreading, lexA regulon	Null	b0215
dnaT	None	DNA biosynthesis protein (primosomal protein I)	Factor; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	Primasomal protein i	Null	b4362
dnaX	dnaZ	DNA polymerase III/DNA elongation factor III, tau and gamma subunits	Enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	DNA polymerase III holoenzyme, tau and gamma ATPase subunits; gamma chain (aa 1-431) is main subunit of the clamp loader complex	The tau chain is the full length protein. The gamma chain is formed by programmed ribosomal frameshifting at codon 431 to a premature stop codon.	b0470
mltD	dniR, yafG	putative membrane-bound lytic murein transglycosylase D	Regulator; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Membrane-bound lytic transglycosylase D, murein hydrolase; periplasmic OM-attached lipoprotein	MltD is an endolytic transglycosylase and an exolytic transglycosylase that can degrade non-crosslinked murein chains (Lee, 2013). MltD can be modified by lysine acetylation in vitro using purified E. coli Pka(YfiQ) (Thao, 2010). MltD has been shown to be a murein hydrolase using zymography, to cause lysis or osmotically-stabilized spheroplasts when overproduced, and to be inhibited by bulgecin (Dijkstra A.J., Rudd, K.E., and Keck, W., A new member of the transglycosylase family of Escherichia coli displays a Gram-positive hydrolase motif, in "The soluble lytic transglycolsylase family of Escherichia coli", A.J. Dijkstra, pp. 85-101, Ph.D. thesis, University of Groningen, the Netherlands, 1997). MltD has two Gram-positive peptidoglycan-binding motifs in the C-terminus. MltD has a central lysozyme-like domain. MltD should cleave the glycosidic bonds between the N-acetylmuramic acid and N-acetylglucosamine residues in murein. The first 15 aa of MltD are a type II signal peptide. The proposed DniR function as a regulator of hexaheme nitrite reductase is probably artifactual. A mutant lacking five murein hydrolases (amiABCmltCD=MHD90) has a delayed lysis phenotype after beta-lactam treatment (Heidrich, 2002).	b0211
acpS	dpj	holo-[acyl-carrier-protein] synthase 1	Enzyme; Fatty acid and phosphatidic acid biosynthesis	ACP-CoA phosphopantetheinyltransferase; Holo-ACP synthase; 4'-phosphopantetheinyl transferase	acpS(dpj) was demonstrated to be an essential gene (Takiff, 1992), consistent with the results of Baba (2006).	b2563
dppA	alu, dpp, fpp	dipeptide/heme ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein; dipeptide chemotaxis receptor	Transport; Not classified	Dipeptide/heme ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein; for transport and chemotaxis	DppA binds dipeptides and heme, and mediates chemotaxis to dipeptides through the Tap chemoreceptor. E. coli does not normally use exogeneous heme, but heme can be utilized if a foreign OM heme receptor is expressed in E. coli; heme and dipeptides compete for the same binding site; MppA is an alternative heme periplasmic binding protein; MppA or DppA is required for the uptake of 5-aminolevulinic acid (Letoffe, 2006). After four hours of Zn(II) stress, DppA protein levels decreased (Easton, 2006).	b3544
dsdA	None	D-serine dehydratase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Amino acids	D-serine dehydratase	Null	b2366
dsdX	dsdC, yfdA, yfdD	D-serine transporter	Transport; Not classified	D-serine permease; D-serine tolerance	DsdX has been functionally characterized in E. coli strain CFT073 (Anfora, 2006). IT (Ion Transporter) superfamily (Prakash, 2003). ST(3) structural class based on hydropathy profile (Lolkema, 2003).	b2365
dut	dnaS, sof	deoxyuridinetriphosphatase	Enzyme; 2'-Deoxyribonucleotide metabolism	dUTP pyrophosphatase; dUTPase	dut is an essential gene.	b3640
ebgA	None	evolved beta-D-galactosidase, alpha subunit	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Evolved beta-D-galactosidase, alpha subunit; normal substrate and function unknown; alpha(4)beta(4) holoenzyme	Wildtype EbgA can be mutated to hydrolyze lactose. EbgA has an Ig-like domain: pfam PF00703 aligns to residues 209-318. ebgA, uidA and lacZ are paralogs.	b3076
ebgC	None	evolved beta-D-galactosidase, beta subunit; cupin superfamily	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Evolved beta-D-galactosidase, beta subunit; cupin superfamily; normal substrate and function unknown; alpha(4)beta(4) holoenzyme	EbgC is required for full activity: it has been suggested to be involved in the rate-limiting degalactosylation step and/or in electrophilic catalysis by the EbgA active site Mg(2+). EbgC is a distant homolog of YiaL, YhcH and TabA(YjgK), all four match PF04074; although homologous to the beta subunit of the EbgAC evolved beta-galactosidase, no potential EbgA-like alpha subunit partners are apparent for the other three DUF386 family paralogs.	b3077
ebgR	None	transcriptional repressor	Regulator; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	ebgAC operon repressor	Wildtype EbgR is inducible by lactose, although this is probably not the natural inducer. LacI family. 8/89 EbgR peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed (Maillet, 2007).	b3075
eco	eti	ecotin, a serine protease inhibitor	Regulator; Degradation of proteins, peptides, glyco	Ecotin, serine protease inhibitor	Null	b2209
eda	hga, kdgA, kga	KHG/KDPG aldolase; 2-dehydro-3-deoxy-phosphogluconate/4-hydroxy-2-oxoglutarate aldolase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Entner-Douderoff	KHG/KDPG aldolase; 2-dehydro-3-deoxy-phosphogluconate/4-hydroxy-2-oxoglutarate aldolase; trimeric	Eda and Edd are enzymes unique to the Enter-Doudoroff pathway (Conway, 1992; Peekhaus, 1998; Flamholz, 2013). KDG is derived from pectin, a common plant heteropolysaccharide, although E. coli K-12 does not secrete pectinases or uptake pectin oligosaccharides and has only the core KDG regulon as compared to plant pathogens like Erwinia chrysanthemi, whose extracellular pectate lyases and intacellular oligogalacturonate lyase breaks pectin down mainly into 5-keto-4-deoxyuronate (DKI) monomers and to a lesser extent polygalacturonase-generated galacturonate; in E. coli K-12 galacturonate uptake and degradation is mediated by the ExuT permease and the UxaABC catabolic enzymes producing KDG, respectively, and DKI is imported by the KdgR-regulated KDG importer KdgT and catabolized to KDG by the KdgR-regulated KduID enyzymes, also producing KDG; KDG is converted to pyruvate and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate by KdsK and Eda(KdsA) (Rodionov, 2004; Hugouvieux-Cotte-Pattat, 1996). 2-keto-4-hydroxyglutarate aldolase is also known as 4-hydroxy-2-oxoglutarate aldolase. KdgR regulon.	b1850
edd	None	6-phosphogluconate dehydratase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Entner-Douderoff	Phosphogluconate dehydratase; growth on gluconate	Eda and Edd are enzymes unique to the Enter-Doudoroff pathway (Conway, 1992; Peekhaus, 1998; Flamholz, 2013).	b1851
eno	None	enolase	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Glycolysis	Enolase; phosphoprotein; component of RNA degradosome	Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004).	b2779
entA	None	2,3-dihydro-2,3-dihydroxybenzoate dehydrogenase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Enterochelin	2,3-Dihydro-2,3-dihydroxybenzoate dehydrogenase; enterobactin biosynthesis	In addition to its role in iron acquisition, enterobactin plays a role in oxidative stress protection and is required to form colonies on M9 minimal media aerobically (Adler, 2014).	b0596
entB	entG	isochorismatase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Enterochelin	Isochorismatase, aryl carrier protein (ArCP); also called 2,3-dihydro-2,3-dihydroxybenzoate synthase; enterobactin biosynthesis	In addition to its role in iron acquisition, enterobactin plays a role in oxidative stress protection and is required to form colonies on M9 minimal media aerobically (Adler, 2014).	b0595
entC	fepF	isochorismate synthase 1	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Enterochelin	Isochorismate synthase; enterobactin biosynthesis	In addition to its role in iron acquisition, enterobactin plays a role in oxidative stress protection and is required to form colonies on M9 minimal media aerobically (Adler, 2014).	b0593
entD	None	phosphopantetheinyltransferase component of enterobactin synthase multienzyme complex	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Enterochelin	Enterochelin synthase, component D; EntB(ArCP)/EntF-CoA phosphopantetheinyltransferase; facilitates secretion of enterobactin peptide; enterobactin biosynthesis	In addition to its role in iron acquisition, enterobactin plays a role in oxidative stress protection and is required to form colonies on M9 minimal media aerobically (Adler, 2014).	b0583
entE	None	2,3-dihydroxybenzoate-AMP ligase component of enterobactin synthase multienzyme complex	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Enterochelin	Enterochelin synthase, component E; 2,3-dihydroxybenzoate (DHB)-AMP ligase; holo-EntB(ArCP)-S-DHB formation; enterobactin biosynthesis	In addition to its role in iron acquisition, enterobactin plays a role in oxidative stress protection and is required to form colonies on M9 minimal media aerobically (Adler, 2014).	b0594
entF	None	enterobactin synthase multienzyme complex component, ATP-dependent	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Enterochelin	Enterochelin synthase, component F; multifunctional: holo-EntF(PCP), primed by EntD; seryl-AMP, seryl-S-EntF synthase; DHB-Ser-S-EntF intermediate formation; enterobactin biosynthesis	EntF is a four domain (condensation-adenylation-peptidyl carrier protein-thioesterase) nonribosomal peptide synthase responsible for synthesis of the siderophore enterobactin (Shaw-Reid, 1999). The chain-releasing thioesterase (TE) domain of EntF is both a cyclotrimerizing lactone synthase and an elongation catalyst for ester-bond formation between covalently tethered dihydroxybenzoate-serine moieties (Shaw-Reid, 1999). The adenylation activity of EntF is stimulated by the co-purifying MbtH-like factor YbdZ; the affinity of EntF for L-ser was improved 15-fold in the presence of YbdZ (Felnagle, 2010). In addition to its role in iron acquisition, enterobactin plays a role in oxidative stress protection and is required to form colonies on M9 minimal media aerobically (Adler, 2014).	b0586
lpxC	asmB, envA	UDP-3-O-acyl N-acetylglucosamine deacetylase	Enzyme; Surface polysaccharides & antigens	Lipid A synthesis, UDP-3-O-(R-3-hydroxymyristoyl)-N-acetylglucosamine deacetylase; zinc metalloamidase; cell envelope and cell separation	LpxC regulated degradation is facilitated by FtsH.	b0096
acrE	envC	cytoplasmic membrane lipoprotein	Membrane; Inner membrane	AcrEF-TolC efflux pump, multidrug/solvent resistance; membrane-fusion lipoprotein	AcrE is attached to the inner membrane. AcrEF confers resistance to nalidixic acid, acriflavin, indole and solvents. acrE is an acrA paralog. May have role in cell division. The first 23 aa of AcrE constitute a type II signal peptide.	b3265
acrF	envD	multidrug efflux system protein	Membrane; Drug/analog sensitivity	AcrEF-TolC efflux pump, multidrug/solvent resistance; osmotically remedial envelope defect	AcrEF confers resistance to nalidixic acid, acriflavin, indole and solvents. May have role in cell division. acrF is an acrB paralog. RND family transporter.	b3266
envY	None	porin thermoregulatory transcriptional activator	Structural component; Outer membrane constituents	Thermoregulatory activator of porin expression, AraC family	EnvY thermoregulates ompA, ompC, lamB and envelope proteins.	b0566
envZ	cpr, ompB, perA, tpo	sensory histidine kinase in two-component regulatory system with OmpR	Enzyme; Global regulatory functions	Osmosensor histidine protein kinase/phosphatase; regulates production of outer membrane proteins; dimeric	Mutations in envZ have increased motility in the presence of high [NaCl], which normally suppresses motility (Girgis, 2007). The cognate response regulator for EnvZ is OmpR. 	b3404
era	sdgE	membrane-associated, 16S rRNA-binding GTPase	Factor; Global regulatory functions	Ribosome-associated GTPase essential for growth; also required for a normal adaptation response to thermal stress; GTP-dependent autophosphorylating protein kinase activity; membrane-associated, 16S rRNA-binding protein; cell cycle arrest	era was demonstrated to be an essential gene (Takiff, 1992), consistent with the results of Baba (2006). Growth rate regulated. Binds MazG; era mutation suppresses dnaG-Ts.	b2566
exbB	None	membrane spanning protein in TonB-ExbB-ExbD complex	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Cations	Uptake of enterochelin; resistance or sensitivity to colicins; similarity with TolQ	Null	b3006
exbD	None	membrane spanning protein in TonB-ExbB-ExbD complex	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Cations	Uptake of enterochelin; resistance or sensitivity to colicins; similarity with TolR	Null	b3005
fabA	None	beta-hydroxydecanoyl thioester dehydrase	Enzyme; Fatty acid and phosphatidic acid biosynthesis	3R-3-hydroxydecanoyl acyl carrier protein (ACP) dehydratase; also called beta-hydroxydecanoylthioester dehydrase	FabA is a member of the HotDog superfamily of thioesterases and dehydratases (Pfam CL0050, PF07977; PDB 1MKA, 1MKB) (Dillon, 2004). Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004).	b0954
fabB	fabC	3-oxoacyl-[acyl-carrier-protein] synthase I	Enzyme; Fatty acid and phosphatidic acid biosynthesis	3-oxoacyl-[acyl-carrier-protein] synthase I; beta-Ketoacyl-ACP synthase I; KAS I; homodimeric	FabB is responsible for the elongation of the cis-3-decenoyl-ACP produced by FabA (Feng, 2009).	b2323
accB	fabE	acetyl CoA carboxylase, BCCP subunit	Carrier; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: biotin carboxyl carrier protein (BCCP)	Acetyl-CoA carboxylase, biotin carboxyl carrier protein; BCCP; homodimeric	AccB is biotinylated on K122 by BirA.	b3255
accC	fabG	acetyl-CoA carboxylase, biotin carboxylase subunit	Enzyme; Fatty acid and phosphatidic acid biosynthesis	Acetyl-CoA carboxylase, biotin carboxylase (BC) subunit	accC mutations result in negative cooperativity with respect to the substrate bicarbonate. accC mutations affecting Arg 338 reveal arginine plays a role in carboxyl transfer to biotin.	b3256
fabH	None	3-oxoacyl-[acyl-carrier-protein] synthase III	Enzyme; Fatty acid and phosphatidic acid biosynthesis	Beta-ketoacyl-ACP synthase III; KAS III; monomer	The previous conclusion that fabH is an essential gene was based on experiments in a spoT1 genetic background; fabH deletion mutants do not survive in a spoT mutant background; fabH deletions grow slowly in a spoT+ background and form small cells (Yao, 2012). fabH was reported to be an essential gene, in conflict with the presence of a deletion in the Keio collection (Lai, 2003).	b1091
fadA	oldA	3-ketoacyl-CoA thiolase (thiolase I)	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Fatty acids	3-ketoacyl-CoA thiolase, fatty acid oxidation complex subunit beta	 FadR regulon. FadAB and FadIJ are paralogs.	b3845
fadB	oldB	fused 3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA epimerase/delta(3)-cis-delta(2)-trans-enoyl-CoA isomerase/enoyl-CoA hydratase/3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Fatty acids	Multifunctional fatty acid oxidation complex subunit alpha; four enzyme activities: L-3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase, 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA epimerase, dodecenoyl-CoA-delta-isomerase, and small-chain-length enoyl-CoA hydratase (cronotase)	 FadR regulon. FadAB and FadIJ are paralogs. Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004).	b3846
fadL	ttr	long-chain fatty acid outer membrane transporter	Enzyme; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	Fatty acid transport protein, outer membrane; long-chain fatty acid receptor	The yfcZ-fadL divergent operon promoter region binds FNR (Federowicz, 2014).	b2344
fadR	dec, ole, oleR, thdB	fatty acid metabolism regulon transcriptional regulator	Regulator; Degradation of small molecules: Fatty acids	Repressor/activator for fatty acid metabolism regulon; fatty acid-responsive transcription factor; fabAB, iclR activator (regulates aceBAK, glyoxylate shunt); fad repressor; homodimeric	The fad genes are induced and fabAB, iclR are repressed by long chain acyl-CoA thioesters binding to and releasing FadR from the DNA. FadR is a GntR-type DNA-binding transcriptional regulator.	b1187
fbaA	ald, fba, fda	fructose-bisphosphate aldolase, class II	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Glycolysis	Fructose 1,6-bisphosphate aldolase, class II; binds Zn(II); homodimeric	Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004). kbaY, gatY, fbaA and ydjI are paralogs. Lysine K9 of FbaA can be modified to either N6-acetyllysine, N6-malonyllysine or N6-succinyllysine; 7 additional FbaA lysines can be modified to N6-succinyllysine including K72, K115, K231, K251, K319, K326 and K348 (Zhang, 2009; Zhang, 2011; Peng, 2011).	b2925
fbp	fdp	fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase I	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Gluconeogenesis	Fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase; allosteric: inhibited by AMP	Null	b4232
fdhE	None	formate dehydrogenase formation protein	Phenotype; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Redox enzyme maturation protein (REMP) for FdnG/FdoG; required for formate dehydrogenase activity; probable cytoplasmic protein	Null	b3891
fdhF	None	formate dehydrogenase-H, selenopolypeptide subunit	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Formate dehydrogenase H, selenopeptide; molybdate-dependent, sulfur-dependent; part of FHL-1 and FHL-2 (formate hydrogenlyase) complexes	The UGA stop codon 140 is translated as selenocysteine in vivo and indicated as a "U" in the protein sequence.	b4079
fecA	None	TonB-dependent outer membrane ferric citrate transporter and signal transducer; ferric citrate extracelluar receptor; FecR-interacting protein	Membrane; Transport of small molecules: Cations	TonB-dependent outer membrane ferric citrate transporter; signal transducer: ferric citrate extracelluar receptor and transmembrane signaling transmittor to the periplasmic sigma-19 activating protein FecR; ferric citrate uptake and iron utilization	The cytoplasmic C-terminal domain of FecR is an anti-sigma-19 factor, but sigma-19 (FecI) also requires FecR to function; in the absence of ferric citrate FecI is bound to the membrane by the cytoplasmic domain of the FecR transmembrane signal transducer, which both sequesters FecI and activates or protects FecI; exogenous ferric citrate induces outer membrane transmembrane transducer FecA to signal inner membrane transmembrane transducer FecR to release membrane-bound FecI to bind cytoplasmic core RNA polymerase and activate Fur-dependent fec operon transcription to allow ferric citrate import and relief of iron starvation (Braun, 2006; Treviño-Quintanilla, 2013). The Fec iron uptake and transmembrane signaling diferric dicitrate substrate [Fe(3+) citrate]2, is more simply referred to as ferric citrate (Braun, 2005).	b4291
fecB	None	ferric citrate ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Cations	Ferric citrate ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein	The Fec iron uptake and transmembrane signaling diferric dicitrate substrate [Fe(3+) citrate]2, is more simply referred to as ferric citrate (Braun, 2005). The first 21 aa of FecB predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b4290
fecC	None	ferric citrate ABC transporter permease	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Cations	Ferric citrate ABC transporter permease	The Fec iron uptake and transmembrane signaling diferric dicitrate substrate [Fe(3+) citrate]2, is more simply referred to as ferric citrate (Braun, 2005).	b4289
fecD	None	ferric citrate ABC transporter permease	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Cations	Ferric citrate ABC transporter permease	The Fec iron uptake and transmembrane signaling diferric dicitrate substrate [Fe(3+) citrate]2, is more simply referred to as ferric citrate (Braun, 2005). FecD has a probable false positive lipoprotein prediction, 9 CM TMs predicted, Cys not conserved.	b4288
fecE	None	ferric citrate ABC transporter ATPase	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Cations	Ferric citrate ABC transporter ATPase	The Fec iron uptake and transmembrane signaling diferric dicitrate substrate [Fe(3+) citrate]2, is more simply referred to as ferric citrate (Braun, 2005).	b4287
fecI	None	RNA polymerase sigma-19 factor, fec operon-specific; ECF sigma factor	Regulator; Global regulatory functions	RNA polymerase sigma-19 factor; fecA promoter RNAP sigma factor	The cytoplasmic C-terminal domain of FecR is an anti-sigma-19 factor, but sigma-19 (FecI) also requires FecR to function; in the absence of ferric citrate FecI is bound to the membrane by the cytoplasmic domain of the FecR transmembrane signal transducer, which both sequesters FecI and activates or protects FecI; exogenous ferric citrate induces outer membrane transmembrane transducer FecA to signal inner membrane transmembrane transducer FecR to release membrane-bound FecI to bind cytoplasmic core RNA polymerase and activate Fur-dependent fec operon transcription to allow ferric citrate import and relief of iron starvation (Braun, 2006; Treviño-Quintanilla, 2013). The Fec iron uptake and transmembrane signaling diferric dicitrate substrate [Fe(3+) citrate]2, is more simply referred to as ferric citrate (Braun, 2005). fecI is part of the polyamine modulon (Igarashi, 2006).	b4293
fecR	None	anti-sigma transmembrane signal transducer for ferric citrate transport; periplasmic FecA-bound ferric citrate sensor and cytoplasmic FecI ECF sigma factor activator	Regulator; Transport of small molecules: Cations	Anti-sigma-19 ferric citrate transmembrane signal transducer; periplasmic signal receiver for FecA-bound extracellular ferric citrate and transmittor for cytoplasmic sigma-19 activation	The cytoplasmic C-terminal domain of FecR is an anti-sigma-19 factor, but sigma-19 (FecI) also requires FecR to function; in the absence of ferric citrate FecI is bound to the membrane by the cytoplasmic domain of the FecR transmembrane signal transducer, which both sequesters FecI and activates or protects FecI; exogenous ferric citrate induces outer membrane transmembrane transducer FecA to signal inner membrane transmembrane transducer FecR to release membrane-bound FecI to bind cytoplasmic core RNA polymerase and activate Fur-dependent fec operon transcription to allow ferric citrate import and relief of iron starvation (Braun, 2006; Treviño-Quintanilla, 2013). A fecR mutant has increased cell aggregation and biofilm formation (Brombacher, 2006). The Fec iron uptake and transmembrane signaling diferric dicitrate substrate [Fe(3+) citrate]2, is more simply referred to as ferric citrate (Braun, 2005). 	b4292
fepA	cbr, cbt, fep, feuB	ferrienterobactin outer membrane transporter	Membrane; Transport of small molecules: Cations	Ferrienterobactin outer membrane receptor	Null	b0584
fepB	None	ferrienterobactin ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Cations	Ferrienterobactin ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein	Null	b0592
fepC	None	ferrienterobactin ABC transporter ATPase	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Cations	Ferrienterobactin ABC transporter ATPase	Null	b0588
fepD	None	ferrienterobactin ABC transporter permease	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Cations	Ferrienterobactin ABC transporter permease	Null	b0590
fepE	None	regulator of length of O-antigen component of lipopolysaccharide chains	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Cations	Ferrienterobactin transport, membrane protein; regulator of length of O-antigen component of lipopolysaccharide chains	Null	b0587
fepG	None	iron-enterobactin ABC transporter permease	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Cations	Ferrienterobactin ABC transporter permease	Probable false positive lipoprotein prediction, 9 CM TMs predicted, Cys not conserved in enterics.	b0589
fes	None	enterobactin/ferrienterobactin esterase	Enzyme; Transport of small molecules: Cations	Enterochelin esterase	26 additional amino acids are added at the N-terminus of Fes despite a reported N-terminal amino acid sequence supposedly confirming the previous start; Fes has been removed from the Verified Set since the start site previously identified now seems unlikely (Pettis, 1988). A peptide encoded in the 26 aa N-terminal extension was identified in a shotgun MS experiment, supporting the upstream start site for Fes (Krug, 2013). Although neither of the proposed start sites for Fes have good RBS sites, the downstream ATG is not conserved whereas the upstream start site and amino acid sequence is conserved.	b0585
ffh	None	Signal Recognition Particle (SRP) component with 4.5S RNA (ffs)	Transport; Protein, peptide secretion	Signal Recognition Particle (SRP) protein, with 4.5S RNA; GTPase involved in co-translational protein translocation into and through membranes	Binds nascent signal peptides, GTP and 4.5S RNA. The Ffh GTPase is stimulated by FtsY and the FtsY GTPase is stimulated by Ffh. Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004). OtherPDB (T. aquaticus): 2CNW.	b2610
fhlA	fhl	formate hydrogenlyase transcriptional activator	Regulator; Energy metabolism, carbon: Fermentation	Formate hydrogen lyase system activator, global regulator	Null	b2731
fhuA	T1, tonA	ferrichrome outer membrane transporter	Membrane; Outer membrane constituents	Outer membrane transporter for ferrichrome-iron; interacts with TonB; receptor for microcin J25, colicin M, and phages T1, T5, phi80; transports albomycin and rifamycin	fhuA mutants are albomycin resistant.	b0150
fhuB	None	iron(3+)-hydroxamate import ABC transporter permease	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Cations	Iron(3+)-hydroxamate import ABC transporter permease; ferrichrome uptake	fhuB mutants are albomycin resistant. FhuB has 20 transmembrane helices. The N- and C-terminal halves of FhuB are homologous. 	b0153
fhuC	None	iron(3+)-hydroxamate import ABC transporter ATPase	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Cations	Iron(3+)-hydroxamate import ABC transporter ATPase; ferrichrome uptake	fhuC mutants are albomycin resistant.	b0151
fhuD	None	iron(3+)-hydroxamate import ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Cations	Iron(3+)-hydroxamate import ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein; ferrichrome uptake; fhuD mutants are albomycin resistant	Ferric hydroxamate siderophores all require FhuD for import, e.g. ferrichrome, gallichrome, desferrioxamine, coprogen, aerobactin, and the antibiotic albomycin. Verified Tat substrate: FhuD has a predicted Tat-only (Class I) 30 aa signal peptide (Tullman-Ercek, 2007). The N-terminal sequence in Rohrback (1995), cited in UniProtKB, does not verify this putative SPI cleavage; it is the product of an enterokinase cleavage of a cloning construct. Rohrback (1995) demonstrated proper folding of FhuD in the cytoplasm prior to export, consistent with FhuD needing the Tat pathway, which exports folded proteins.	b0152
fhuE	None	ferric-rhodotorulic acid outer membrane transporter	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Cations	Outer membrane receptor for ferric-rhodotorulic acid; also receptor for ferric siderophores coprogen and ferrioxamine B	False positive lipoprotein prediction, verified SPI substrate.	b1102
fic	vhpT(B.s.)	stationary phase-induced protein, putative toxin	Null	Stationary phase-induced protein, putative toxin	A G55R Fic mutant forms cAMP-induced filaments at elevated temperatures (Utsumi, 1982). The B. schoenbuchensis YhfG homolog antitoxin VhpA binds to and inhibits the adenylyltransferase toxin VhpT that is homologous to Fic (Engel, 2012). Fic/YhfG may constitute a toxin/antitoxin pair (Yamaguchi, 2011). Fic is related to the phage P1 protein kinase toxin Doc (Pfam PF02661) and contains a variant Fido domain (HxFx[D/E]GSGLxxR) that could have either protein kinase or adenosine monophosphate-protein transferase activity (Kinch, 2009; Engel, 2012; Castro-Roa, 2013). fic is RpoS-regulated during stationary phase (Tanaka, 1993; Utsumi, 1993; Tanaka, 1995; Utsumi, 1995; Miksch, 1995). Although Fic was reported to be similar to FtsA, this similarity is not obvious and is not statistically significant (Kawamukai, 1989). OtherPDB (B. schoenbuchensis): 3SHG. OtherPDB (H. somnus): 3N3V. otherPDB (V. parahaemolyticus): 3LET.	b3361
fimA	fimD, pilA	major type 1 subunit fimbrin (pilin)	Structural component; Surface structures	Fimbrin type 1, major structural subunit; phase variation	Prototype of the FimA family.	b4314
fimB	None	tyrosine recombinase/inversion of on/off regulator of fimA	Regulator; Surface structures	Site-specific recombinase, fimA promoter inversion; mediates fimbriae phase switching, along with FimE	Insertion mutations in fimB and fimE are hyper-fimbriated and defective in swimming motility, but have normal swarming (Girgis, 2007).	b4312
fimC	None	periplasmic chaperone	Factor; Surface structures	Periplasmic chaperone for type 1 fimbriae; FimCD chaperone-usher transport	The crystal structure of the pilus elongation complex in which the tip complex assembly composed of FimC, FimF, FimG and FimH passes through the usher porin FimD has been determined (Geibel, 2013). FimC has Ig-like domains: pfam PF00345 aligns to N-terminal residues 37-157, and pfam PF02753 aligns to C-terminal residues 161-237. The first 36 aa of FimC are a type I signal peptide.	b4316
fimD	None	fimbrial usher outer membrane porin protein; FimCD chaperone-usher	Membrane; Outer membrane constituents	Fimbrial usher outer membrane porin protein; export, assembly and anchoring of type 1 fimbriae (pili); FimCD chaperone-usher	The multi-domain dimeric FimD usher protein has an N-terminal periplasmic chaperone-pilin (fimbrial subunit) complex-binding domain and a porin-like beta barrel outer membrane transport and anchoring domain that forms twin pores in the outer membrane which can be blocked by a periplasmic middle-pore plug domain; a C-terminal periplasmic domain facilitates fimbria (pilus) assembly (Klemm, 1900; Saulino, 1998; Saulino, 2002; Thanassi, 2002; Barnhart, 2003; Nishiyama, 2003; Sauer, 2004; Li, 2004; Capitani, 2006; So, 2006; Remaut, 2008). The crystal structure of the pilus elongation complex in which the tip complex assembly composed of FimC, FimF, FimG and FimH passes through the usher porin FimD has been determined (Geibel, 2013). The first 45 aa of FimD constitute a cleavable type I signal peptide. Some of the detailed features of FimD structure and function are extrapolated from experiments with the homologous PapC usher protein of uropathogenic E. coli.	b4317
fimE	hyp	tyrosine recombinase/inversion of on/off regulator of fimA	Regulator; Surface structures	Site-specific recombinase, fimA promoter inversion; biased towards the "ON to OFF" fimbriae phase switching direction	FimE forms a transient covalent Tyr linkage to DNA. Insertion mutations in fimB and fimE are hyper-fimbriated and defective in swimming motility, but have normal swarming (Girgis, 2007).	b4313
fimF	None	minor component of type 1 fimbriae	Structural component; Surface structures	Fimbrin type 1 minor component; fimbrial morphology, assembly	The crystal structure of the pilus elongation complex in which the tip complex assembly composed of FimC, FimF, FimG and FimH passes through the usher porin FimD has been determined (Geibel, 2013). FimF is one of 25 FimA homologs in E. coli K-12. The first 22 aa of FimF are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b4318
fimG	None	minor component of type 1 fimbriae	Structural component; Surface structures	Fimbrin type 1 minor component; fimbriae length; perhaps inhibits polymerization in type 1 fimbriae assembly	The crystal structure of the pilus elongation complex in which the tip complex assembly composed of FimC, FimF, FimG and FimH passes through the usher porin FimD has been determined (Geibel, 2013). FimG is one of 25 FimA homologs in E. coli K-12. fimG is induced during biofilm formation. The first 23 aa of FimG are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b4319
fimH	None	minor component of type 1 fimbriae	Structural component; Surface structures	Minor type 1 fimbrial subunit; membrane-specific adhesin; mediates mannose-binding to host surfaces	The crystal structure of the pilus elongation complex in which the tip complex assembly composed of FimC, FimF, FimG and FimH passes through the usher porin FimD has been determined (Geibel, 2013). Mutants of FimH have been isolated that auto-aggregate (Schembri, 2001). FimH has a false positive lipoprotein prediction and has a verified 21 aa cleavable typeI signal peptide. Prototype of the FimH family.	b4320
lpxD	firA, omsA, ssc	UDP-3-O-(3-hydroxymyristoyl)-glucosamine N-acyltransferase	Enzyme; Surface polysaccharides & antigens	Lipid A synthesis, UDP-3-O-(R-3-hydroxymyristoyl)-glucosamine N-acyltransferase	LpxD contains 25 hexapeptide repeats. The lpxD gene is essential.	b0179
fis	nbp	global DNA-binding transcriptional dual regulator	Factor; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	Transcriptional activator for rRNA operons, bends DNA; interacts with RNAP; nucleoid-associated protein; dimeric	fis transcription is supercoiling-dependent. Overexpression causes filamentous biofilm formation. Decreased levels of Fis inhibit open complex formation, inhibiting oriC unwinding by blocking IHF and DnaA low affinity binding sites. Polyamine modulon (Igarashi, 2006). Mutations in fis affect chromosomal supercoiling.	b3261
fldA	None	flavodoxin 1	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Electron transport	Flavodoxin I	Essential gene.	b0684
flhC	flaI	flagellar class II regulon transcriptional activator, with FlhD	Regulator; Surface structures	Transcriptional activator of flagellar class II operons; forms heterotetramer with FlhD; CsrA regulon; may be allosteric effector of FlhD	pgsA mutants are non-motile due to elevated RpoS levels that repress flhDC transcription; pgsA3 multicopy suppressers gadW, metE and nudL(yeaB) act by increasing RpoS levels (Uchiyama, 2010). YdiV functions as an anti-FlhD4C2 factor in vitro, binding FlhD4C2 and blocking its activation of the flagellar regulon; YdiV is poorly translated explaining why E. coli does not have reduced motility at low nutrient concentrations mediated by YdiV and alleviated by fliZ mutation (Wada, 2012).	b1891
flhD	flbB	flagellar class II regulon transcriptional activator, with FlhC	Regulator; Surface structures	Transcriptional activator of flagellar class II operons; forms heterotetramer with FlhC	pgsA mutants are non-motile due to elevated RpoS levels that repress flhDC transcription; pgsA3 multicopy suppressers gadW, metE and nudL(yeaB) act by increasing RpoS levels (Uchiyama, 2010). YdiV functions as an anti-FlhD4C2 factor, binding FlhD4C2 and blocking its activation of the flagellar regulon; YdiV is poorly translated explaining why E. coli does not have reduced motility at low nutrient concentrations mediated by YdiV and alleviated by fliZ mutation (Wada, 2012). CsrA regulon.	b1892
fliC	flaF, H, hag	flagellar filament structural protein (flagellin)	Structural component; Surface structures	Flagellin, structural gene, H-antigen	Flagellar regulon.	b1923
fliL	cheC1, flaAI, flaQI	flagellar biosynthesis protein	Putative structure; Surface structures	Affects rotational direction of flagella during chemotaxis	Probable false positive lipoprotein prediction due to Cys not being conserved.	b1944
fliM	cheC2, flaA, flaAII, flaQII	flagellar motor switching and energizing component	Structural component; Surface structures	Flagellar synthesis, motor switching and energizing	FliM is part of the FliGMN switch complex on the rotor of the bacterial flagellum. A CTG start 34 codons preceding the current start has been proposed as an alternative start codon, but the lack of conservation, overlap with fliL, and the presence of unusual aa pairs (PP and CC) suggests the current start site is correct; experimental verification is needed (Maillet, 2007).	b1945
fliN	motD	flagellar motor switching and energizing component	Structural component; Surface structures	Flagellar switch protein	FliGMN switch complex on the rotor of the bacterial flagellum.	b1946
fnr	nirA, nirR, ossA	oxygen-sensing anaerobic growth regulon transcriptional regulator FNR; autorepressor	Regulator; Global regulatory functions	Global transcription factor for anaerobic growth; FNR; [4FE-4S] cluster; homodimeric	FNR represses genes involved in aerobic respiration and activates genes required for anaerobic respiration.	b1334
folA	tmrA	dihydrofolate reductase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Folic acid	Dihydrofolate reductase; trimethoprim resistance	folA is an essential gene. TyrR regulon.	b0048
folC	dedC	bifunctional folylpolyglutamate synthase/ dihydrofolate synthase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Folic acid	Dihydrofolate:folylpolyglutamate synthase	folC and dedD are expressed from a polycistronic accD-folC-dedD mRNA expressed as a readthrough transcript of the monocistronic accD transcriptional terminator (Bognar, 1987).	b2315
folD	ads	bifunctional 5,10-methylene-tetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase/ 5,10-methylene-tetrahydrofolate cyclohydrolase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Folic acid	Methenyltetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase/cyclohydrolase	Null	b0529
mutM	fpg	formamidopyrimidine/5-formyluracil/ 5-hydroxymethyluracil DNA glycosylase	Enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	Formamidopyrimidine-DNA glycosylase/AP lyase; 5'-terminal deoxyribophosphodiesterase; DNA repair; GC to TA; binds Zn(II)	MutM prefers oxidized purines, such as 7,8-dihydro-8-oxoguanine (8-oxoG).	b3635
frdA	None	anaerobic fumarate reductase catalytic and NAD/flavoprotein subunit	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Fumarate reductase flavoprotein subunit	Purified FrdAB has fumurate reductase activity and has low level succinate dehydrogenase activity (Dickie, 1979). FrdA was shown to be covalently modified with an FAD linked through the methyl group at position 8alpha to the N(3) of one of the FrdA histidine residues (Weiner, 1979). His45 was predicted to be the site of FrdA flavinylation with FAD by similarity to the sequenced histidine-modified bovine heart flavopeptide SHTVAAXGGIBLAAGBMDEBXWR (Kenney, 1972; Cole, 1982). Substitutions of FrdA at His45 still allow tight binding of FAD non-covalently but nonetheless still result in defective enzyme activities (Blaut, 1989). In vitro flavinylation of FrdA using crude extracts was stimulated by citrate, isocitrate, succinate and fumarate (Brandsch, 1989). The crystal structure shows that His45 of FrdA is covalently modified with FAD to form tele-8alpha-FAD histidine (Iverson, 1999). SdhE, the SdhA flavinylator, may also facilitate FrdA flavinylation (McNeil, 2013). The FrdA N-terminus is blocked so it could not be protein sequenced to verify the start; if the fMet is clipped then the Glu2 could form a blocking pyroglutamate, J. H. Weiner, personal communication cited in (Cole, 1982). frdA transcription is repressed by nitrate via the NarXL system. Repression is both direct by repressing promoter activity and indirect by repressing dcuS promoter activity. FrdAB and OmpW form a complex (Huang, 2006). HT_Cmplx15_Mem: FrdA+FrdB.	b4154
frdB	None	fumarate reductase (anaerobic), Fe-S subunit	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Fumarate reductase iron-sulfur protein subunit	Purified FrdAB has fumurate reductase activity and has low level succinate dehydrogenase activity (Dickie, 1979). FrdAB and OmpW form a complex (Huang, 2006). HT_Cmplx15_Mem: FrdA+FrdB.	b4153
frdC	None	fumarate reductase (anaerobic), membrane anchor subunit	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Fumarate reductase membrane anchor polypeptide	Null	b4152
frdD	None	fumarate reductase (anaerobic), membrane anchor subunit	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Fumarate reductase membrane anchor polypeptide	Null	b4151
fre	fadI, flrD, fsrC, hsm-6	NAD(P)H-flavin reductase	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Electron transport	NAD(P)H-flavin reductase; ferrisiderophore reductase C	The fre gene was mistakenly thought to be ubiB.	b3844
frr	rrf	ribosome recycling factor	Factor; Proteins - translation and modification	Ribosome recycling factor (RRF); dissociates ribosomes from mRNA after termination of translation; tRNA mimic	frr is an essential gene. RRF interacts with EF-G.	b0172
fruA	ptsF	fused fructose-specific PTS enzymes: IIBcomponent/IIC components	Regulator; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Fructose permease, PTS Enzyme IIBC component	FruA has two N-terminal fructose-specific EIIB regulatory domains and a C-terminal EIIC permease channel domain. In the probable fructose-specific PTS kinase cascade, the autophosphorylated enzyme I (PtsI) His189-P transfers a phosphate to His299 in the HPr-like FPr domain of FruB; His299-P transfers a phosphate to His62 of the FruB EIIA domain; His62-P transfers its phosphate to Cys112 of the EIIB domain of FruA and from EIIB to fructose during sugar uptake. The FruA C-terminal domain, the last 200 residues, is a member of LysE superfamily.	b2167
fruK	fpk	fructose-1-phosphate kinase	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Glycolysis	Fructose-1-phosphate kinase; 1-phosphofructokinase	Repressed during biofilm formation.	b2168
cra	fruC, fruR, fruS?, serR?, shl	transcriptional repressor-activator for carbon metabolism	Regulator; Energy metabolism, carbon: Glycolysis	Catabolite repressor-activator	Originally named FruR for its role in fructose regulation, the role of Cra(FruR) as a global regulator of catabolite regualtion includes the regulation of many other genes involved in central carbon metabolism (Saier, 1996; Shimada, 2011).	b0080
ftsA	divA	ATP-binding cell division FtsK recruitment protein	Phenotype; Cell division	Cell division and septation protein, specific role unknown; recruited to FtsZ ring	FtsA is an essential gene. ftsA* mutants no longer require zipA. Divisome.	b0094
ftsE	None	cell division ATP-binding protein	Phenotype; Not classified	Cell division ATP-binding protein; associated with the inner membrane via FtsX; null mutant has filamentous growth and requires high salt for viability	Divisome, non-essential. FtsE is a member of the ABC transporter ATPase subunit family, and is included in the ABC transporter Topic, but a transport function has not been established for FtsE.	b3463
ftsI	pbpB, sep	transpeptidase involved in septal peptidoglycan synthesis; penicillin-binding protein 3	Enzyme; Cell division	Transpetidase, PBP3; penicillin-binding protein 3 involved in septal peptidoglycan synthesis	FtsI is recruited by its cognate SEDS protein FtsW. ftsI is an ssential gene (Hara, 1997). FtsI was reported to be a lipoprotein, but only 15% of the protein was modified; the physiological significance of this is unknown and the leader sequence is not predicted to have a lipoprotein cleavage site (Hayashi, 1988). Divisome protein. FtsN has been shown by FRET to directly interact with itself, FtsW, FtsI and ZapA (Alexeeva, 2010). ZapA has been shown by FRET to directly interact with itself, FtsN, FtsZ and FtsI (Alexeeva, 2010).	b0084
ftsQ	None	divisome assembly protein, membrane anchored protein involved in growth of wall at septum	Phenotype; Cell division	Divisome assembly protein; cell division and growth of wall at septum	Overexpression of ftsQ causes filamentous biofilm formation. Although FtsQ co-precipitates with FtsL and FtsB, it does not require the presence of FtsLB for mid-cell localization. FtsQ is a single transmembrane helix inner membrane protein; the 25 N-terminal aa are in cytoplasm; the last 225 aa are in periplasm. FtsQ is an essential gene. FtsQ is localized to septum by its periplasmic domain. FtsQ is targeted by SRP/FtsY to Sec/YidC for membrane insertion. FtsQ is divisome protein. blr is a multi-copy suppressor of ftsQ1(Ts), obviating the need for salt-suppression of ftsQ1; blr mutations exacerbate the ftsQ1(Ts) phenotype (Karimova, 2012).	b0093
rsmD	yhhF	16S rRNA m(2)G966 methyltransferase, SAM-dependent	Enzyme; rRNA modification	16S rRNA m(2)G966 methyltransferase, SAM-dependent	A rsmD(yhhF) mutation confers a slight growth disadvantage. RsmD modifies rRNA in intact 30S subunits.	b3465
ftsW	None	putative lipid II flippase; integral membrane protein; FtsZ ring stabilizer	Membrane; Cell division	Putative lipid II flippase; divisome protein recruiting FtsI; SEDS protein	Inactivation of MurJ in vivo, but not FtsW, blocks lipid II translocation (Sham, 2014). Overproduced FtsW but not overproduced MurJ increases lipid II translocation across the cytoplasmic membrane in crude reconstituted vesicles (Mohammadi, 2011). Both FtsW and MurJ are involved in lipid II translocation but which one is the actual flippase is controversial with conflicting in vivo and in vitro results; the in vitro results utilize crude membrane vesicles that also contain MurJ, which may not be limiting; the in vivo results do not demonstrate flippase activity directly and FtsW inactivation could be incomplete, so one of the two proteins could be stimulating the other which has the flippase activity; MurJ is related to known flippase exporters and FtsW is not, suggesting that MurJ may indeed be the actual flippase (Young, 2014). FtsW faciltates septal petidoglycan synthesis by recruiting the cognate FtsI transpeptidase. FtsW is required for mrdA(PBP2) expression. ftsW is paralogous to mrdB(rodA). ftsW is an essential gene. Divisome protein. FtsN has been shown by FRET to directly interact with itself, FtsW, FtsI and ZapA (Alexeeva, 2010).	b0089
ftsX	ftsS	putative ABC transporter permease	Membrane; Cell division	Integral membrane protein invoved in cell division; binds FtsE to the inner membrane	Overexpression causes filamentous biofilm formation. Divisome, non-essential.	b3462
ftsY	None	Signal Recognition Particle (SRP) receptor	Membrane; Cell division	Signal recognition particle (SRP) receptor, GTPase	The Ffh GTPase is stimulated by FtsY and the FtsY GTPase is stimulated by Ffh. FtsY binds ribosomes in a SRP (Ffh+Ffs) particle- and GTP-dependent manner, releasing trigger factor (Tig) from the ribosome (Buskiewicz, 2004). FtsY is found as both membrane-associated isoforms and as shorter soluble isoforms which are lacking the N-terminal 14 aa; FtsY is attached to the cytoplasmic membrane by its association with the secYEG translocon and the FtsY N-terminal 14 aa cleavable membrane anchor facilitates this association by first transiently anchoring FtsY to the membrane (Luirink, 1994; Weiche, 2008). The N-termini of both short and long forms have been verified (Luirink, 1994; Weiche, 2008). OtherPDB (T. aquaticus): 2CNW.	b3464
ftsZ	sfiB, sulB	GTP-binding tubulin-like cell division protein	Enzyme; Cell division	Septal ring GTPase required for cell division and growth; initiation of septation; tubulin-like protein	SlmA disassembles FtsZ polymers in vitro (Cho, 2011). ZapA(YgfE) binding promotes FtsZ polymer bundling and inhibits the GTPase activity of FtsZ (Small, 2007). ZapC binding promotes FtsZ polymer bundling (lateral interactions) and inhibits the GTPase activity of FtsZ (Hale, 2011; Durand-Heredia, 2011). Overexpression of ZapC causes filamentation and aberrant FtsZ filaments (Hale, 2011; Durand-Heredia, 2011). FtsZ is stored in a dynamic helical FtsZ cytoskeleton upon disassembly of the Z ring in daughter cells. Overexpression causes filamentous biofilm formation. Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004). Divisome protein. ZapA has been shown by FRET to directly interact with itself, FtsN, FtsZ and FtsI (Alexeeva, 2010).	b0095
fucA	fucC, prd	L-fuculose-1-phosphate aldolase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	L-fuculose-1-phosphate aldolase	Null	b2800
fucI	None	L-fucose isomerase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	L-fucose isomerase	Null	b2802
fucK	None	L-fuculokinase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	L-fuculose kinase	Although the N-terminal sequence of FucK was reported to be MLXG, consistent with the annotated start MLSGYIAGAIMK (Tonella, 1998), FucK has been removed from the Verified Set and its start site has been reset to M11-K12, removing the first 10 amino acids, based on three strong lines of bioinformatics evidence: (1) all protein sequence alignments to FucK orthologs show that the MK- start is conserved but not the upstream MLSG- start, (2) the conserved start has a very likely RBS (<B>AGGAG</B>CGATT-ATG-AAA) and (3) it removes a 12 base overlap with REP204, which was a unique and unlikely scenario. The source of this likely error is unknown but the 2D gel spot identified as FucK may need further verification, i.e. more unique N-terminal sequence data, to resolve the discrepancy.	b2803
fucO	None	L-1,2-propanediol oxidoreductase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	L-1,2-Propanediol oxidoreductase	An alternative fucO ATG start codon that precedes the annotated start codon might be utilized to form a 383 aa primary FucO translation product.	b2799
fucP	None	L-fucose transporter	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	Fucose permease	Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS). 	b2801
fucR	None	l-fucose operon activator	Regulator; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Positive regulatory protein for fuc regulon	Null	b2805
fucU	None	L-fucose mutarotase	Phenotype; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	L-fucose mutarotase	FucU also has D-ribose pyranase activity (Ryu, 2004).	b2804
fumA	None	fumarate hydratase (fumarase A), aerobic Class I	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: TCA cycle	Fumarase A, aerobic; negatively regulated by ryhB RNA as part of indirect positive regulation by Fur	Null	b1612
fumB	None	anaerobic class I fumarate hydratase (fumarase B)	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: TCA cycle	Fumarase B, anaerobic	FumB is required for anaerobic D-tartrate utilization and fumB mutants have reduced D-tartrate dehydratase activity (Kim, 2007).	b4122
fumC	None	fumarate hydratase (fumarase C),aerobic Class II	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: TCA cycle	Fumarase C, aerobic	SoxRS regulon.	b1611
fur	None	ferric iron uptake regulon transcriptional repressor; autorepressor	Regulator; Global regulatory functions	Ferric iron uptake global transcriptional repressor; Fe(2)-responsive; zinc metalloprotein	Fur translation is coupled to the translation of the upstream leader peptide Uof; Uof translation is inhibited by the antisense sRNA ryhB; Uof translation opens up a hairpin that blocks Fur translation (Vecerek, 2007). Amino acid composition analysis indicates that the first Met is missing from the mature Fur protein (Wee, 1988). Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004).	b0683
fusA	far, fus	protein chain elongation factor EF-G, GTP-binding	Factor; Proteins - translation and modification	Elongation Factor EF-G; GTPase required for translocation from the A-site to the P-site in the ribosome; fusidic acid resistance	YpfJ could be cross-liked to FusA in vivo (Yang, 2012). Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004). HT_Cmplx23_Cyt: FusA+Tsf+TufA. Ribosomal protein L7/L12 activates the GTPase activity of EF-G (Kischa, 1971; Hamel, 1972; Nechifor, 2007).	b3340
gabT	None	4-aminobutyrate aminotransferase, PLP-dependent	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	4-aminobutyrate aminotransferase	PuuE and GabT are redundant enzymes in putrescine catabolism (Schneider, 2012).	b2662
galE	galD	UDP-galactose-4-epimerase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	UDP-galactose 4-epimerase; hexose-1-phosphate uridylyltransferase	GalE and YfcH are paralogs.	b0759
galK	galA	galactokinase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Galactokinase	Null	b0757
galR	None	galactose-inducible d-galactose regulon transcriptional repressor; autorepressor	Regulator; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	 D-galactose regulon transcriptional repressor; galactose-inducible; autorepressor	Null	b2837
galS	mglD	galactose- and fucose-inducible galactose regulon transcriptional isorepressor; mgl operon transcriptional repressor; autorepressor	Regulator; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Repressor of the mgl operon and isorepressor of the gal operon; autoregulatory; homodimeric	Null	b2151
galT	galB	galactose-1-phosphate uridylyltransferase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Galactose-1-phosphate uridylyltransferase; Rob regulon, repressed	Null	b0758
gapA	None	glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase A	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Glycolysis	Glyceraldehyde 3-P dehydrogenase A	A gapA mutant is not in the Keio collection; gapA mutants were not expected to grow on the medium used to attempt to isolate them; gapA is not an essential gene (Baba, 2006). Similar to eukaryotic GAPDH. Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004). GapA binds selenium tightly even after denaturation, possibly as a perselenide to the active site Cys150, perhaps indicative of a role in selenium transport (Lacourciere, 2002). The C-terminal lysine K331 of GapA can be modified to either N6-malonyllysine or N6-succinyllysine; 10 additional GapA lysines can be modified to N6-succinyllysine (Zhang, 2011; Peng, 2011). GapA lysines K132, K138, K184, K198, and K249 can be modifed to N6-acetyllysine (Yu, 2008; Zhang, 2009). The msrB-gapAyeaD divergent operon promoter region binds FNR and gapA-yeaD expression is activated by FNR (Federowicz, 2014).	b1779
epd	gapB	D-erythrose 4-phosphate dehydrogenase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism	Erythrose-4-P dehydrogenase	Null	b2927
gcd	None	glucose dehydrogenase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Glucose dehydrogenase (pyrroloquinoline-quinone) quinoprotein; inner membrane protein	Null	b0124
ispG	gcpE	1-hydroxy-2-methyl-2-(E)-butenyl 4-diphosphate synthase	Null	1-hydroxy-2-methyl-2-(E)-butenyl 4-diphosphate synthase; alternative nonmevalonate (DXP) pathway for terpenoid biosynthesis; [4Fe-4S] protein	The IspG substrate is 2C-methyl-d-erythritol 2,4-cyclodiphosphate. In vitro activity requires auxiliary protein(s), probably as shuttles for redox equivalents. E. coli ispG(gcpE) complements the P. stuartii aarC1 defect in quorum sensing regulation of gene expression. The ispG gene is essential. otherPDB (A. aeolicus): 3NOY. otherPDB (T. thermophilus): 2Y0F.	b2515
gcvH	None	glycine cleavage complex lipoylprotein	Carrier; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	Glycine cleavage, carrier of aminomethyl group	Null	b2904
gdhA	None	glutamate dehydrogenase, NADP-specific	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Glutamate	Glutamate dehydrogenase, hexameric	Null	b1761
hokC	gef	toxic membrane protein, small	Null	Small toxic membrane polypeptide, multimeric; homologous to plasmid-encoded plasmid stabilization toxins regulated by antisense RNA; functional relevance of chromosomal homologs is unknown	Null	b4412
ggt	None	gamma-glutamyltranspeptidase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Thioredoxin, glutaredoxin, glutathione	Gamma-glutamyltranspeptidase, glutathione metabolism; Ntn hydrolase; autocatalytic processing into two subunits; periplasmic	The small subunit of Ggt is residues 26-390; the large subunit is residues 391-580; T391 is the N-terminal nucleophile. False positive lipoprotein prediction, verified SPI substrate.	b3447
mnmG	gidA, mnmB, trmF	5-methylaminomethyl-2-thiouridine modification at tRNA U34	Enzyme; tRNA modification	5-methylaminomethyl-2-thiouridine modification at tRNA U34	MnmG facilitates cmnm(5) addition to tRNA-s(2)U34, forming (with prior MnmE action) tRNA-cmnm(5)s(2)U34, an intermediate in mnm(5)s(2)U34 synthesis. mnmG function is based on genetic experiments showing that it is in the same pathway as mnmE and that mnmE is epistatic to mnmG. MnmG contains an essential FAD-binding site (Yim, 2006). The basis of the mnmG(GidA) glucose-inhibited division phenotype is unknown. The proposal that mnmG(gidA) and trmF are allelic is based on similar phenotypes and map positions (Bregeon, 2001). MnmG(GidA) may have additional functions in the modification of RNA or DNA. MnmG(GidA) and MnmE form a heterotetrameric complex (Yim, 2006). mnmG has a promoter for the mnmG-rsmG operon (Kölling, 1988; Benítez-Páez).	b3741
rsmG	gidB	16S rRNA m(7)G527 methyltransferase, SAM-dependent; glucose-inhibited cell-division protein	Enzyme; rRNA modification; phenotype; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	16S rRNA m(7)G527 methyltransferase, SAM-dependent; mutant has low level streptomycin resistance	An E. coli rsmG(gidB) deletion confers streptomycin resistance and GidB is RsmG (Okamoto, 2007). rsmG has its own promoter as well as the one for the mnmG-rsmG operon (Kölling, 1988; Benítez-Páez).	b3740
glgA	None	glycogen synthase	Enzyme; Macromolecule synthesis, modification: Polysaccharides - (cytoplasmic)	Glycogen synthase	Null	b3429
glgB	None	1,4-alpha-glucan branching enzyme	Enzyme; Macromolecule synthesis, modification: Polysaccharides - (cytoplasmic)	1,4-alpha-glucan branching enzyme; glycogen branching enzyme	Null	b3432
glgC	None	glucose-1-phosphate adenylyltransferase	Enzyme; Macromolecule synthesis, modification: Polysaccharides - (cytoplasmic)	Glucose-1-phosphate adenylyltransferase; ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase	Null	b3430
glgP	glgY	glycogen phosphorylase	Enzyme; Macromolecule synthesis, modification: Polysaccharides - (cytoplasmic)	Glycogen phosphorylase; alpha-glucan phosphorylase	Null	b3428
glgX	None	glycogen debranching enzyme	Enzyme; Macromolecule synthesis, modification: Polysaccharides - (cytoplasmic)	Glycogen debranching enzyme	Null	b3431
glmS	None	L-glutamine:D-fructose-6-phosphate aminotransferase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Amino sugars	Glucosamine-6-phosphate synthase; glucosamine--fructose-6-phosphate aminotransferase; C-terminal F6P-binding domain has isomerase activity	YhbJ(RapZ) is an adaptor protein that recruits GlmZ to the catalytic domain of RNase E; GlmY is an anti-adaptor decoy sRNA that binds YhbJ(RapZ) competitively with GlmZ, protecting it from degradation (Göpel, 2013). GlmS synthesis is negatively feedback regulated by glucosamine-6-phosphate, and YhbJ(RapZ) enables degradation the GlmZ sRNA; unprocessed GlmZ upregulates glmS mRNA post-translationally by mediating an RNase E cleavage of the glmS mRNA (Kalamorz, 2007). The GlmY sRNA upregulates glmS post-transcriptionally (Urban, 2007). GlmS can be inactivated by various halomethyl and methyl ketone derivatives, of which bromomethyl ketone derivative is most effective because of its high binding affinity. Cys2 is an N-terminal nucleophile for GlmS.	b3729
glnA	None	glutamine synthetase	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Glutamine	Glutamine synthase	Zinc progressively induces the dodecameric rings of GlnA to aggregate into fibers (Miller, 1974). glnA is induced during biofilm formation. glnA mutants have reduced OM vesiculation (McBroom, 2006).	b3870
glnB	None	regulatory protein P-II for glutamine synthetase	Regulator; Amino acid biosynthesis: Glutamine	PII regulatory protein for glutamine synthase; potent activator of NRII/GlnL/NtrB phosphatase and inhibitor of NRII autophosphorylation; activates adenylation of GlnA by GlnE	GlnB is the archetypal PII protein; a ubiquitous family of small trimeric signal transduction proteins that facilitate regulation of bacterial nitrogen metabolism by controlling the activities of a variety of enzymes, transcription factors and membrane proteins. In nitrogen limitation GlnB is subject to post-translational modification by uridylylation (mediated by GlnD) of Tyr51 in the T-loop of each subunit. This modification is reversed in N-sufficient conditions. GlnB interacts with and regulates the activities of the histidine protein kinase NtrB, which controls phosphorylation of NtrC. It also regulates the activity of adenylyltransferase (GlnE) which in turn regulates the activity of glutamine synthetase (GlnA). glnK is a glnB paralog. [Comment provided by EcoTeam member Mike Merrick, 11.16.06]	b2553
glnG	glnT, ntrC	fused DNA-binding response regulator in two-component regulatory system with GlnL: response regulator/sigma54 interaction protein	Regulator; Amino acid biosynthesis: Glutamine	Nitrogen regulator I	Null	b3868
glnH	None	glutamine transporter subunit	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	Glutamine-binding protein, periplasmic	After four hours of Zn(II) stress, GlnH protein levels decreased; glnH mispelled as ginH (Easton, 2006).	b0811
glnL	glnR, ntrB	sensory histidine kinase in two-component regulatory system with GlnG	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Glutamine	Bifunctional kinase/phosphatase, nitrogen regulator II, NRII; homodimeric	Null	b3869
glnP	None	glutamine transporter subunit	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	Glutamine transport system permease protein GlnP	Null	b0810
glnQ	None	glutamine transporter subunit	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	Glutamine high-affinity transport system, ATP-binding protein	Null	b0809
glnS	None	glutamyl-tRNA synthetase	Enzyme; Aminoacyl tRNA synthetases, tRNA modification	Glutamine--tRNA ligase	Null	b0680
glpA	None	anaerobic sn-glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, large FAD/NAD(P)-binding subunit	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Anaerobic glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase subunit A; FAD-binding	GlpAB is the catalytic dimer and GlpC is the iron-sulfur protein and membrane anchor; the GlpC and GlpB names are sometimes switched.	b2241
glpB	glpC, psi-51	anaerobic sn-glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase membrane anchor subunit	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Anaerobic glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase subunit B; FMN-binding	GlpAB is the catalytic dimer and GlpC is the iron-sulfur protein and membrane anchor; the GlpC and GlpB names are sometimes switched.	b2242
glpC	glpB	anaerobic sn-glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, C subunit, 4Fe-4S iron-sulfur cluster	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Anaerobic glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase subunit C; 4Fe-4S iron-sulfur cluster and membrane anchor	The GlpC subunit of glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase has an N-terminal 4Fe-4S dicluster domain (pfam PF12838) with 8 conserved Cys residues; GlpC also has two C-terminal cysteine-rich domains (Pfam PF02754) each with invariant CCG motifs and two conserved single Cys residues that may be a membrane anchor. GlpAB is the catalytic dimer and GlpC is the iron-sulfur protein and membrane anchor; the GlpC and GlpB names are sometimes switched. glcF and glpC are homologous horizontal transfer (HT) genes. glpC was also identified as responsiible for increased organic solvent tolerance. HT_Cmplx44_Mem: GlpC+KdgK+YahK.	b2243
glpD	glyD	sn-glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, aerobic, FAD/NAD(P)-binding	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Aerobic respiration	sn-Glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (aerobic); membrane-anchored	LpxB and GlpD associate in vitro.	b3426
glpE	None	thiosulfate:cyanide sulfurtransferase (rhodanese)	Phenotype; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Thiosulfate:cyanide sulfurtransferase (rhodanese); in glpEGR operon, induced by glycerol	glpE, yceA and yibN are paralogs.	b3425
glpF	None	glycerol facilitator	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	Aquaglyceroporin; glycerol facilitator	Null	b3927
glpG	None	rhomboid intramembrane serine protease	Phenotype; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Rhomboid intramembrane serine protease; complements the phenotypic defects of P. stuartii aarA; mutant is slightly cefotaxime resistant	Six transmembrane regions verified. Induced by glycerol.	b3424
glpK	None	glycerol kinase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	Glycerol kinase	Lysine K233 of GlpK can be modified to N6-malonyllysine (Peng, 2011).	b3926
glpQ	None	periplasmic glycerophosphodiester phosphodiesterase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	Glycerophosphodiester phosphodiesterase, periplasmic; tetrameric	GlpQ co-expression increases the overproduction of cloned membrane proteins (Skretas, 2010).	b2239
glpR'	None	pseudogene, DNA-binding transcriptional repressor	Regulator; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Pseudogene, repressor of glp regulon; induced by glycerol phophate; tetrameric	The glpR pseudogene in MG1655(Seq) is a lab mutation with a frameshift mutation (deletion of G at codon 51) acquired during the genome sequencing process; normal MG1655 strains have an intact glpR gene (Freddolino, 2012). The G at codon 51 has been reinserted in the glpR pseudogene reconstruction displayed by the DNA button; the protein tab displays the reconstructed GlpR protein sequence; the DNA tab shows the unreconstructed genomic DNA sequence for glpR'.	b3423
glpT	None	sn-glycerol-3-phosphate transporter	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	sn-Glycerol-3-phosphate permease; fosfomycin sensitivity	GlpT exhanges cytoplasmic phosphate for glycerol phosphate. GlpT has 12 TM regions. Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS). GlpT also transports some synthetic organophosphates. cAMP regulon.	b2240
gltA	gluT, icdB	citrate synthase	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: TCA cycle	Citrate synthase; hexameric	Five active site mutations were tested and found to lower GltA in vitro turnover rates including R388L, affecting the orientataion of the oxaloacetate substrate binding; R407L, which allows GltA to metaboliize the competitive inhibitor alpha-ketoglutarate; H265A and D363A, affecting steady-state kinetics; and F384A, affecting the allosteric binding of acetyl-CoA (Pereira, 1994).	b0720
gltB	aspB, ossB, psiQ	glutamate synthase, large subunit	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	Glutamate synthase, large subunit; autoprotease	The N-terminal 11 aa propeptide of GltB is processed autolytically and the mature protein starts at residue 12, as confirmed by N-terminal protein sequencing; an alternate start codon 93 bases upstream has been noted (Oliver, 1987). Although this upstream gltB start codon is preceded by an RBS sequence, the upstream protein sequence is not conserved and is interrupted by stop codons in Salmonella and other closely related bacteria. Cys12 acts as both the proteolytic nucleophile in the autocleavage event and the N-terminal cysteine active site for the glutamine amidotransferase activity; the 11 aa propeptide autocleavage is the only known proteolytic activity of the MEROPS family C44 proteases and the mature C44 proteases are devoid of protease activity (Rawlings, 2014). The yhcC-gltBDF divergent operon promoter region binds ArcA (Federowicz, 2014).	b3212
gltD	aspB, ossB, psiQ	glutamate synthase, 4Fe-4S protein, small subunit	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	Glutamate synthase, small subunit	The yhcC-gltBDF divergent operon promoter region binds ArcA (Federowicz, 2014).	b3213
gltP	None	glutamate/aspartate:proton symporter	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	Proton-glutamate-aspartate transport protein	Null	b4077
gltS	gltC	glutamate transporter	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	Glutamate permease; Na+/glutamate symporter	Predicted to be in the ST(3) structural class based on hydropathy profile (Lolkema, 2003), but is was not placed in the very similar IT superfamily in a study using phylogenetic methods (Prakash, 2003).	b3653
gltX	None	glutamyl-tRNA synthetase	Enzyme; Aminoacyl tRNA synthetases, tRNA modification	Glutamate--tRNA ligase	The zinc binding motif Cys98-x-Cys100-x(24)-Cys125-x-H127 of GltX categorizes this as a SWIM domain (standard C-x-C-x(n)-C-x-H with n=6-25); mutation analysis (C100Y) indicates SWIM plays a minimal role in overall binding of tRNA, but an increased role in orientation of the acceptor 3?-terminal adenosine.	b2400
glyA	None	serine hydroxymethyltransferase	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Glycine	Serine hydroxymethyltransferase; binds Zn(II)	Null	b2551
glyQ	cfcA, glyS(A)	glycine tRNA synthetase, alpha subunit	Enzyme; Aminoacyl tRNA synthetases, tRNA modification	Glycine--tRNA ligase, alpha-subunit	otherPDB(C. jejuni): 3RGL, 3RF1, 3UFG (Tan, 2012).	b3560
glyS	gly-act, glyS(B)	glycine tRNA synthetase, beta subunit	Enzyme; Aminoacyl tRNA synthetases, tRNA modification	Glycine--tRNA ligase, beta-subunit	glyS is an essential gene (Toth, 1990). The glyS mutants in the Keio collection have been shown to harbor an intact copy of glyS in addition to the deletion allele (Yamamoto, 2009).	b3559
gnd	None	6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase, decarboxylating	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Oxidative branch, pentose pathway	6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase, decarboxylating	Null	b2029
gor	gorA	glutathione oxidoreductase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Thioredoxin, glutaredoxin, glutathione	Glutathione reductase, NADP+, FAD-binding	Null	b3500
gpp	gppA	guanosine pentaphosphatase/exopolyphosphatase	Enzyme; Global regulatory functions	Guanosine pentaphosphatase and exopolyphosphatase	Null	b3779
gpt	gpp, gxu	xanthine phosphoribosyltransferase; xanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase	Enzyme; Salvage of nucleosides and nucleotides	Xanthine phosphoribosyltransferase; xanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase	Null	b0238
greA	None	transcript cleavage factor	Regulator; Proteins - translation and modification	Transcript cleavage factor	Two thirds of the greA P1- and P2-initiated transcripts terminate imprecisely in the greA leader region; the array of short greA leader transcripts are termed GraL (Potrykus, 2010). HT_Cmplx24_Cyt: DksA+GreA. Coiled coil domain.	b3181
grpE	None	heat shock protein	IS, phage, Tn; Phage-related functions and prophages	Nucleotide exchange factor for the DnaKJ chaperone; heat shock protein; mutant survives lambda induction; stimulates DnaK and HscC ATPase	HT_Cmplx22_Cyt: DnaK+GrpE+GyrA+RpsA.	b2614
grxA	grx	glutaredoxin 1, redox coenzyme for ribonucleotide reductase (RNR1a)	Carrier; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Thioredoxin, glutaredoxin, glutathione	Glutaredoxin 1	Null	b0849
gshA	gshI	glutamate-cysteine ligase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Thioredoxin, glutaredoxin, glutathione	Glutamate--cysteine ligase; gamma-Glutamylcysteine synthase	GshA also can combine Glu and various amines to form gamma-glutamylamides (Miyake, 2009).	b2688
gshB	gsh-II	glutathione synthetase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Thioredoxin, glutaredoxin, glutathione	Glutathione synthase; homotetrameric	Null	b2947
guaA	None	GMP synthetase (glutamine aminotransferase)	Enzyme; Purine ribonucleotide biosynthesis	GMP synthase	Null	b2507
guaB	guaR	IMP dehydrogenase	Enzyme; Purine ribonucleotide biosynthesis	Inosine-5'-monophosphate (IMP) dehydrogenase	GuaB binds CT-rich ssDNA (Kozhevnikova, 2012). De novo biosynthesis of guanine nucleotides is rate-limited by IMP. IMP has two regions, one catalytic domain and the other a functionally conserved single-stranded nucleic acid binding subdomain.	b2508
guaC	None	GMP reductase	Enzyme; Purine ribonucleotide biosynthesis	GMP reductase	Null	b0104
gyrA	hisW, nalA, nfxA, norA, parD	DNA gyrase (type II topoisomerase), subunit A	Enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	DNA gyrase, subunit A; nalidixic acid resistance; cold shock regulon	gyrA is an essential gene. HT_Cmplx22_Cyt: DnaK+GrpE+GyrA+RpsA.	b2231
gyrB	acrB, Cou, himB, hisU, hopA, nalC, parA, pcbA, pcpA	DNA gyrase, subunit B	Enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	DNA gyrase, subunit B; novobiocin, coumermycin resistance	gyrB is an essential gene.	b3699
hdhA	hsd, hsdH	7-alpha-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase, NAD-dependent	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	7-alpha-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase	Null	b1619
helD	srjB	DNA helicase IV	Enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	ATP-dependent DNA Helicase IV	Overexpression causes filamentous biofilm formation.	b0962
hemA	gtrA	glutamyl tRNA reductase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Heme, porphyrin	Glutamyl-tRNA reductase, hemin biosynthesis; neomycin sensitivity	Null	b1210
hemB	ncf	5-aminolevulinate dehydratase (porphobilinogen synthase)	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Heme, porphyrin	5-Aminolevulinate dehydratase; also known as porphobilinogen synthase; binds Zn(II)	The hemB auxotropic strain RP523 has unmapped mutation(s) that make the cells permeable to heme, forming the basis of an expression system for heme substitution (Li, 1988; Woodward, 2007; Winter, 2013).	b0369
hemC	popE	hydroxymethylbilane synthase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Heme, porphyrin	Porphobilinogen deaminase; neomycin sensitivity	Null	b3805
hemD	None	uroporphyrinogen III synthase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Heme, porphyrin	Uroporphyrinogen III synthase; neomycin sensitivity	2/14 HemD peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed (Maillet, 2007).	b3804
hemH	popA, visA	ferrochelatase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Heme, porphyrin	Ferrochelatase	Null	b0475
hemL	gsa?, popC	glutamate-1-semialdehyde aminotransferase (aminomutase)	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Heme, porphyrin	Glutamate-1-semialdehyde aminomutase	Mg(2+) stimulon-PhoPQ regulon, EvgAS-PhoPQ cascade enhanced expression subset.	b0154
hemX	None	putative uroporphyrinogen III methyltransferase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Heme, porphyrin	Uroporphyrinogen III methyltransferase	Null	b3803
hemY	None	putative protoheme IX synthesis protein	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Heme, porphyrin	Predicted protoheme IX biogenesis protein; TPR repeats	Null	b3802
hflC	hflA	HflB protease modulator specific for phage lambda cII repressor	Enzyme; Degradation of proteins, peptides, glyco	Membrane bound protease complex, with FtsH and HflK; regulates lysogeny; non-essential	Gain-of-function alleles in hflC and hflK inhibit FtsH-mediated degradation of uncomplexed SecY protein and other membrane protein substrates. Null hflC or hflK alleles stabilize cytoplasmic substrate cII. hflCK is a multicopy suppressor of ftsH htpX double mutant. Serine protease-like motif in HflC not required for cII degradation. HflC and HflK have periplasmic prohibitin homology (PHB) domains. The PHB domain is also called the SPFH domain, named after the proteins Stomatin, Prohibitin, Flotillin and HflK/C (Tavernarakis, 1999; Morrow, 2005; Rivera-Milla, 2006; Browman, 2007). HflC belongs to subfamily SPFH3b (Hinderhofer, 2009). HT_Cmplx45_Mem: HflC+HybC+BamB.	b4175
hflK	hflA, hslY	modulator for HflB protease specific for phage lambda cII repressor	Enzyme; Degradation of proteins, peptides, glyco	Membrane bound protease complex with FtsH and HflC; regulates lysogeny; non-essential	Gain-of-function alleles in hflC and hflK inhibit FtsH-mediated degradation of uncomplexed SecY protein and other membrane protein substrates. Null hflC or hflK alleles stabilize cytoplasmic substrate cII. hflCK is a multicopy suppressor of ftsH htpX double mutant. HflC and HflK have periplasmic prohibitin homology (PHB) domains. The PHB domain is also called the SPFH domain, named after the proteins Stomatin, Prohibitin, Flotillin and HflK/C (Tavernarakis, 1999; Morrow, 2005; Rivera-Milla, 2006; Browman, 2007). HflK belongs to subfamily SPFH3a (Hinderhofer, 2009). 	b4174
hflX	hflA, hslX	GTPase, stimulated by 50S subunit binding; Mn(2+) homeostasis regulator	Enzyme; Degradation of proteins, peptides, glyco	GTPase, stimulated by 50S subunit binding; role in Mn(2+) homeostasis	hflX mutants are Mn(2+)-sensitive and HflX is involved in Mn(2+) homeostasis (Kaur, 2014). HflX has both GTPase and ATPase activities (Jain, 2009; Dutta, 2009). HflX itself does not affect transposition efficiency and an earlier report of a defect may be due to a polar effect on hflKC (Twiss, 2005; Dutta, 2009).	b4173
hfq	None	global sRNA chaperone; HF-I, host factor for RNA phage Q beta replication	Factor; Phage-related functions and prophages	Global regulator of sRNA function; host factor for RNA phage Q beta replication; HF-I; DNA- and RNA-binding protein; RNA chaperone; binds ATP and RNAP	The C-terminal of Hfq is not necessary for hexamerization. RNA binding is located primarily at the N-terminal. Although Hfq has been reported to have intrinsic ATPase activity, a subsequent study identifies the Hfq-associated ATPase activity as a heat-labile contaminant (Sukhodolets, 2003; Arluison, 2007; Hämmerle, 2012). Hfq has multiple regulatory roles including the destabilzation of ompA mRNA, improved rpoS translation, and as a co-factor for the DsrA sRNA DsrA.	b4172
hha	None	modulator of gene expression, with H-NS	Regulator; Proteins - translation and modification	Modulates hemolysin expression, in complex with H-NS; stimulates transposition events; induced by AI-2 pheromone; promotes conjugation and conjugation-induced biofilms	Hha and Cnu are paralogs. The expression of the hly operon of plasmid pHly152 is modulatedby Hha/HN-S. Overexpression of Cnu(YdgT) partially suppresses the hha defect on hylA expression. Hha positively modulates H-NS expression. Induced during biofilm formation. Structural mimicry and sequence similarity between the Hha/Cnu family of H-NS binding proteins and the H-NS/Stp family N-terminal dimerization domain has been proposed (Nieto, 2002; Madrid, 2007). There is some structural resemblance between Hha/Cnu and the H-NS/Stp N-terminal but whether it reflects a homologous family relationship or convergent evolution seems uncertain.	b0460
ihfA	hid, himA	integration host factor (IHF), DNA-binding protein, alpha subunit	Factor; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	Integration Host Factor (IHF), alpha subunit; host infection, mutant phage lambda; site-specific recombination; sequence-specific DNA-binding transcriptional activator	Null	b1712
ihfB	himD, hip	integration host factor (IHF), DNA-binding protein, beta subunit	Factor; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	Integration Host Factor (IHF), beta subunit; host infection, mutant phage lambda; site-specific recombination; sequence-specific DNA-binding transcriptional activator	Null	b0912
hipB	None	antitoxin of HipAB toxin-antitoxin system	Regulator; Murein sacculus, peptidoglycan	Antitoxin of HipAB TA pair; transcriptional repressor of the hipBA operon; role in persister formation	HipAB has a probable role in cell division. PF01381 family.	b1508
hipA	None	inactivating GltX kinase facilitating persister formation; toxin of HipAB TA pair; autokinase	Enzyme; Protein modification	Inactivating GltX kinase facilitating persister formation; toxin of HipAB TA pair; autokinase	HipA is not EF-Tu kinase; HipA phosphorylates and inactivates GltX (glutamate--tRNA ligase) on active site residue Thr239, causing RelA-dependent ppGpp synthesis and inducing multidrug tolerance and persistence (Germain, 2013). HipA binds and was reported to phosphylate TufA/TufB residue Thr-383 in vitro (Schumacher, 2009). HipA serine protein kinase autophosphorylates Ser150 and this activity is essential for persister formation (Correia, 2006).	b1507
hisA	None	N-(5'-phospho-L-ribosyl-formimino)-5-amino-1-(5'-phosphoribosyl)-4-imidazolecarboxamide isomerase	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Histidine	Phosphoribosylformimino-5-aminoimidazole carboxamide ribotide isomerase; 1-(5'-phosphoribosyl)-5-[(5'-phosphoribosylamino)methylideneamino] imidazole-4-carboxamide isomerase	6/72 HisA peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed (Maillet, 2007).	b2024
hisB	None	histidinol-phosphatase and imidazoleglycerol-phosphate dehydratase	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Histidine	Imidazoleglycerolphosphate dehydratase/histidinol phosphatase; bifunctional enzyme; HAD21	hisB is a multi-copy suppressor of a pdxB deletion (Kim, 2010). HAD superfamily.	b2022
hisC	None	histidinol-phosphate aminotransferase	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Histidine	Histidinol-phosphate aminotransferase	12/219 HisC peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed; 1/219 peptide masses also indicate the Met is occasionally not clipped (Maillet, 2007).	b2021
hisD	None	bifunctional histidinal dehydrogenase/ histidinol dehydrogenase	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Histidine	Histidinol dehydrogenase	Null	b2020
hisF	None	imidazole glycerol phosphate synthase, catalytic subunit with HisH	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Histidine	Imidazole glycerol phosphate (IGP) synthase, cyclase subunit	The N-terminus of purified HisF was sequenced and the fMet is not clipped, but HisF is omitted from the Verified Set because its natural RBS was not used; the natural RBS is very good and this is almost certainly the in vivo start (Klem, 1993).	b2025
hisG	None	ATP phosphoribosyltransferase	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Histidine	ATP-phosphoribosyltransferase	Null	b2019
hisH	None	imidazole glycerol phosphate synthase, glutamine amidotransferase subunit	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Histidine	Imidazole glycerol phosphate (IGP) synthase, amidotransferase	The N-terminus of purified HisH was sequenced confirming that the fMet is not clipped, but the natural RBS was not used so this additional reference is not cited in the Verified Set (Klem, 1993). In addition to the Edman degradation results noted in the Verifed Set, 1/47 peptides identified by MALDI-TOF-MS and the N-terminus was also sequenced by MS/MS analysis, all confirming that the initial Met is not cleaved (Maillet, 2007).	b2023
hisI	hisE, hisIE	phosphoribosyl-AMP cyclohydrolase and phosphoribosyl-ATP pyrophosphatase	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Histidine	PR-ATP pyrophosphatase/PR-AMP cyclohydrolase, bifunctional	Null	b2026
hisP	None	histidine ABC transporter ATPase	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	Histidine ABC transporter ATPase	Null	b2306
hisS	None	histidyl tRNA synthetase	Enzyme; Aminoacyl tRNA synthetases, tRNA modification	Histidine--tRNA ligase	Null	b2514
truA	asuC, hisT, leuK	tRNA pseudouridine(38-40) synthase	Enzyme; tRNA modification	tRNA pseudouridine(38-40) synthase; mutations derepress the his operon attenuator	truA was first identified as hisT, a his operon regulatory mutation, due to its effects on the his attenuator; pleiotropic phenotypes, mutation causes translation errors	b2318
skp	hlpA, ompH	periplasmic chaperone	Factor; Basic proteins - synthesis, modification	Periplasmic molecular chaperone for outer membrane proteins; trimeric	The reported binding to DNA was an artifact due to the cationic nature of Skp.	b0178
hmp	fsrB, hmpA	fused nitric oxide dioxygenase/dihydropteridine reductase 2	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Electron transport	Flavohemoglobin; nitric oxide dioxygenase; dihydropteridine reductase; GSNO and nitrite reductase; has alkylhydroperoxide reductase activity, possibly involved in the repair of lipid membrane oxidative damage	Upregulated by GSNO in defined medium (aerobic) as part of the NsrR regulon. hmp mutants are defective in macrophage survival and swarming motility (Stevanin, 2007).	b2552
hns	B1, bglY, cur, drc, drdX, drs, fimG, H1, hnsA, irk, msyA, osmZ, pilG, topS, topX, verA, virR	global DNA-binding transcriptional dual regulator H-NS	Regulator; Basic proteins - synthesis, modification	DNA-binding global regulator H-NS; diverse mutant phenotypes affecting transcription, transposition, inversion, cryptic-gene expression; involved in chromosome organization; preferentially binds bent DNA; has N-terminal dimerization domain	HN-S forms heteromeric complexes with Hha and Cnu, which modulates HN-S function, expression and stability. Mutations affect chromosomal supercoiling. HT_Cmplx32_Mem: CspC+Hns+HupA.	b1237
hsdM	hsm, hsp	DNA methyltransferase M	Enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	DNA methyltransferase M, host modification of foreign DNA	Null	b4349
hsdR	hsp, hsr	endonuclease R Type I restriction enzyme	Enzyme; Degradation of DNA	Endonuclease R, host restriction of foreign DNA; Type I restriction enzyme; ClpXP-dependent degradation	HsdR acts as a chaperone in hsdS mutant to allow DNA binding.	b4350
hsdS	hsp, hss	specificity determinant for hsdM and hsdR	Enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	Specificity determinant for HsdM and HsdR	Substitution of Trp212 to Arg alters the protein-protein interaction with HsdM, in turn effecting the DNA binding of the molecule; DNA binding in the mutant is restored by HsdR binding.	b4348
htpG	None	protein refolding molecular co-chaperone Hsp90, Hsp70-dependent; heat-shock protein; ATPase	Factor; Chaperones	Protein refolding molecular co-chaperone Hsp90, Hsp70-dependent; heat-shock protein; ATPase; dimeric	HtpG(Hsp90) interacts with DnaK(Hsp70) to remodel heat-inactivated luciferase (Genest (2011). HtpG undergoes substantial nucleotide-dependent conformational rearrangements (Huai, 2005; Shiau, 2006). HtpG can form heterodimers with human HSP90alpha. In vitro, HtpG transitions to oligomeric form at 65C, required for substrate solubilization. Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004). Geldanamycin inhibits HtpG(Hsp90) ATPase activity. HtpG binds RpoH and htpG is in the rpoH regulon.	b0473
htpX	None	putative endopeptidase	Orf; Adaptations, atypical conditions	Zinc metalloprotease HtpX, membrane-bound; cleaves SecY in vivo and in vitro; self-cleaves; M48 family	Overexpression of truncated HtpX promotes degradation of incomplete proteins in puromycin-treated cells. HtpX collaborates with FtsH to eliminate abnormal membrane proteins: an hflX ftsH double mutant is temperature-sensitive for growth. Inactivation of putative protease active site residues abolishes ability to cross-complement defects in the FtsH protease. Start codon verified by toeprint analysis (Kornitzer, 1991). HtpX has a cytosolic active site. HtpX in vivo cleavage of SecY is seen when both are overproduced. Cpx regulon. RpoH regulon. Synthetic lethal with hflB(ftsH) in fabZ(SfhC) background. HtpX has two TM helices. htpX, loiP(yggG), bepA(yfgC) and ycaL are paralogs.	b1829
degP	htrA, ptd	serine endoprotease (protease Do), membrane-associated	Enzyme; Degradation of proteins, peptides, glycopeptides	Periplasmic, membrane-associated serine endoprotease; protease Do, required for high-temperature growth and the degradation of damaged proteins, primarily outer membrane proteins	Autocleavage of DegP occurs after Cys95(Cys69 of mature form) or Gln108 (Gln82 of mature form). Autocleavage of DegP causes hexameric DegP(HtrA) to dissociate into proteolytically active monomers. DegP is targeted to some proteins by CpxP. Sigma E promoter. degP mutants have elevated OM vesiculation (McBroom, 2006). DegP(HtrA) has chaperone activity in vitro as demonstrated by efficient inhibition of the unfolded lysozyme aggregation (Skorko-Glonek, 2007). DegP is associated with outer membrane proteins (OMPs) and is required for the degradation of unfolded OMPs; DegP(HtrA) has very little chaperone activity in cells (Ge, 2013).	b0161
lpxL	htrB, waaM	lauryl-acyl carrier protein (ACP)-dependent acyltransferase	Factor; Adaptations, atypical conditions	Lipid A synthesis, KDO2-lipid IVA lauroyl-ACP acyltransferase; not under heat shock regulation; membrane protein affecting cell division, growth, and high-temperature survival	Null	b1054
ribB	htrP, luxH	3,4-dihydroxy-2-butanone-4-phosphate synthase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Riboflavin	3,4-dihydroxy-2-butanone 4-phosphate synthase; riboflavin biosynthesis; acid-inducible; homodimeric	ribB expression is apparently controlled by a flavin mononucleotide (FMN) responsive riboswitch in the 253 nt 5' UTR. This RFN element 5' UTR has been reported in intergenic sRNA searches as sroG (Vogel, 2003). Attenuation of transcription at the FMN-bound riboswitch produces the 149 nt sroG sRNA, ending at 3182592. The experimentally determined RNA start for sroG is the start of the ribB mRNA. sroG is not annotated as a separate gene and the sroG transcript is part of the ribB mRNA. Mutations in the ribB riboswitch resulting in excretion of riboflavin were isolated as genetic suppressors of a rutE mutation allowing growth on pyrimidines at 37C (Kim, 2010).	b3041
hupA	None	HU, DNA-binding transcriptional regulator, alpha subunit	Factor; Basic proteins - synthesis, modification	Histone-like protein HU-alpha, HU-2	HU concentration in the cell determines the mechanical effect; flexible bends responsible for compaction occur at concentrations <100nM, while increased concentrations result in the formation of a rigid nucleoprotein filament and no significant concentration. Mutant HU alters structure and function of the chromosome. HT_Cmplx32_Mem: CspC+Hns+HupA.	b4000
hupB	dpeA, hopD	HU, DNA-binding transcriptional regulator, beta subunit	Factor; Basic proteins - synthesis, modification	Histone-like protein HU-beta, HU-1	HU concentration in the cell determines the mechanical effect; flexible bends responsible for compaction occur at concentrations <100nM, while increased concentrations result in the formation of a rigid nucleoprotein filament and no significant concentration. Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004).	b0440
hyaA	None	hydrogenase 1, small subunit	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Aerobic respiration	Hydrogenase-1 small subunit, periplasmic	Verified Tat substrate: HyaA has a Tat-only (Class I) 45 aa signal peptide (Tullman-Ercek, 2007). Bound HyaB is co-exported. Repressed during biofilm formation.	b0972
hyaB	None	hydrogenase 1, large subunit	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Aerobic respiration	Hydrogenase-1 large subunit, periplasmic	HyaB is co-exported bound to TAT substrate HyaA. HT_Cmplx26_Mem: HyaB+HybO.	b0973
hyaC	None	hydrogenase 1, b-type cytochrome subunit	Putative enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Aerobic respiration	Hydrogenase 1 b-type cytochrome subunit	Null	b0974
hyaD	None	hydrogenase 1 maturation protease	Factor; Energy metabolism, carbon: Aerobic respiration	Hydrogenase 1 maturation protease	HyaD is involved in the processing of HyaA and HyaB.	b0975
hyaE	None	putative HyaA chaperone	Factor; Energy metabolism, carbon: Aerobic respiration	Probable HyaA chaperone	Null	b0976
hyaF	None	hydrogenase-1 protein nickel incorporation factor 	Phenotype; Energy metabolism, carbon: Aerobic respiration	Nickel incorporation into hydrogenase 1 subunits	Null	b0977
hycA	hevA	regulator of the transcriptional regulator FhlA	Regulator; Energy metabolism, carbon: Fermentation	Regulatory gene for hyc and hyp operons; counteracts activation by FhlA	Null	b2725
hycB	hevB	hydrogenase 3, Fe-S subunit	Putative enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Fermentation	Formate hydrogenlyase complex iron-sulfur protein	FhlA regulon. HycB is a probable electron carrier for Hyd-3. Hydrogenase 3 is part of the formate hydrogenlyase complex.	b2724
hycC	hevC	hydrogenase 3, membrane subunit	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Fermentation	Formate hydrogenlyase complex inner membrane protein	FhlA regulon. Hydrogenase 3 is part of the formate hydrogenlyase complex.	b2723
hycD	hevD	hydrogenase 3, membrane subunit	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Fermentation	Formate hydrogenlyase complex inner membrane protein	FhlA regulon. Hydrogenase 3 is part of the formate hydrogenlyase complex.	b2722
hycE	hevE	hydrogenase 3, large subunit	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Fermentation	Hydrogenase 3 large subunit, [NiFe] cluster; heterodimer	FhlA regulon. Hydrogenase 3 is part of the formate hydrogenlyase complex. Residues 538-569 are removed to form mature protein. Unclipped C-terminus is required for Fe, Ni incorporation. FeNi incorporation is required for C-terminus processing and transport. C-terminal processing causes a conformational change that completes the maturation process.	b2721
hycF	hevF	formate hydrogenlyase complex iron-sulfur protein	Putative enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Fermentation	Formate hydrogenlyase complex iron-sulfur protein	FhlA regulon. HycF is a probable electron carrier for Hyd-3. Hydrogenase 3 is part of the formate hydrogenlyase complex.	b2720
hycG	hevG	hydrogenase 3 and formate hydrogenase complex, HycG subunit	Phenotype; Energy metabolism, carbon: Fermentation	Hydrogenase 3 small subunit	FhlA regulon. Hydrogenase 3 is part of the formate hydrogenlyase complex. Membrane localization of HycE is dependent on HycG.	b2719
hycH	hevH	hydrogenase 3 maturation protein	Factor; Energy metabolism, carbon: Fermentation	Required for converting HycE precursor to mature Hyd-3 large subunit	FhlA regulon. Hydrogenase 3 is part of the formate hydrogenlyase complex.	b2718
zraR	hydG	fused DNA-binding response regulator in two-component regulatory system with ZraS: response regulator/sigma54 interaction protein	Regulator; Energy metabolism, carbon: Fermentation	Two component response regulator for zraP; responsive to Zn(2+) and Pb(2+); autoregulated; regulation of Hyd-3 activity is probably due to crosstalk of overexpressed protein	The N-terminal sequencing of overexpressed protein showed that the fMet is not clipped (Leonhartsberger et al. 2001). However, natural RBS was not used, so it is not included in the Verified set, although this is almost certainly the correct in vivo start site.	b4004
hypA	None	protein involved in nickel insertion into hydrogenases 3	Phenotype; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Hydrogenase 3 accessory protein required for activity; zinc metalloprotein	HypA is a zinc metalloprotein with a separate weak nickel binding site (Atanassova, 2005). HypA and HypB form a complex (Atanassova, 2005). hypA mutants have increased Hydrogenase 2 activity but similar amounts of HypA protein. hypA defect suppressed by expression of hypB-E under foreign promoter, indicating a regulatory or partially redundant function. Paralogous to hybF.	b2726
hypB	hydB, hydE	GTP hydrolase involved in nickel liganding into hydrogenases	Phenotype; Energy metabolism, carbon: Fermentation	Required for metallocenter assembly in Hydrogenases 1,2,3; guanine-nucleotide-binding protein; Ni donor for Hyd-3 large subunit; homodimeric	hypB mutants are pheotypically suppressed by added Ni. HypB has a low level GTPase activity. HypA and HypB form a complex (Atanassova, 2005).	b2727
hypC	None	hydrogenase maturation protein	Phenotype; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Hydrogenase 3 chaperone-type protein; required for Hyd-3 metallocenter assembly, binds HycE subunit	N-terminal Cys is required for function. hypC mutants have reduced Hyd-2 activity.	b2728
hypD	hydF	hydrogenase maturation protein	Phenotype; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Hydrogenases 1,2,3 accessory protein; required for metallocenter assembly	Null	b2729
hypE	hydB	carbamoyl dehydratase, hydrogenases 1,2,3 maturation protein	Factor; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Hydrogenases 1,2,3 accessory protein, carbamoyl dehydratase; required for CN ligand synthesis at the metallocenter; converts thiocarbamate at its C-terminal Cys to a thiocyanate	HypF adds the C-terminal thiocarbamate to HypE.	b2730
iap	None	aminopeptidase in alkaline phosphatase isozyme conversion	Enzyme; Proteins - translation and modification	Alkaline phosphatase isozyme conversion aminopeptidase; generates alkaline phosphatase isozyme 3 subunit lacking the N-terminal Arg	The first 24 aa of Iap are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b2753
icd	icdA, icdE	isocitrate dehydrogenase; e14 prophage attachment site; tellurite reductase	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: TCA cycle; Phage or Prophage Related	Isocitrate dehydrogenase, NADP(+)-specific; e14 attachment site; tellurite reductase	Icd activity is regulated by AceK-mediated phosphorylation/dephosphorylation at Ser113; phosphorylation inactivates Icd by blocking NADP binding (LaPorte, 1984; Borthwick, 1984; Walsh, 1985; McKee, 1989; Hurley, 1989). This icd allele has a C-terminus added during prophage e14 integration at codon 362, introducing 2 amino acid changes in icd. icdC' encodes the original C-terminus of icd. Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004). Icd lysines K100 and K242 can be modified to N6-succinyllysine (Zhang, 2011). Icd lysines K142, K177, K230, K235, K242, K265 and K378 can be modified to N6-acetyllysine (Yu, 2008; Zhang, 2009). Modification of Icd K100 and K242 to succinyllysine, as well as K230 to acetyllysine in stationary phase, may affect Icd activity since those residues are critical for activity and substate binding (Lee, 1995; Bolduc, 1995; Yu, 2008; Zhang, 2011). Icd has tellurite reductase branch activity and and an icd mutant is tellurite-sensitive (Reinoso, 2013).	b1136
argP	can, canR, iciA	transcriptional regulator for arginine transport and DNA replication genes; replication initiation inhibitor	Regulator; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	Inhibitor of chromosome initiation, transcriptional activator, LysR family; oriC iteron (13-mer) binding protein, competes with DnaA for iteron binding	The ArgP(IciA) is a LysR family transcriptional regulator for arginine transport and DNA replication genes. argP mutants are canavanine sensitive. argP is in the pho regulon. ArgP activates the dapB gene in the absense of lysine (Bouvier, 2008).	b2916
iclR	None	transcriptional repressor	Regulator; Central intermediary metabolism: Glyoxylate bypass	Repressor of aceBA operon	Tetrameric (dimer of dimers) IclR binds to the aceBA operator and dimeric IclR is inactive; glyoxylate dissociates IclR and favors dimers; pyruvate promotes binding and favors tetramers (Lorca, 2007). AllR(GclR) and IclR can bind to the same DNA sequence so IclR binds to the AllR(GclR) binding site at the gcl promoter but a deletion of IclR has no effect on gcl transcription, implying other factor(s) may be involved (Walker, 2006).	b4018
ileS	ilvS	isoleucyl-tRNA synthetase	Enzyme; Aminoacyl tRNA synthetases, tRNA modification	Isoleucine--tRNA ligase	ileS is an essential gene (Shiba, 1992). The ileS mutants in the Keio collection have been shown to harbor an intact copy of ileS in addition to the deletion allele (Yamamoto, 2009). The entire protein sequence of IleS has been determined using peptide mapping by MALDI mass spectrometry; 9 aa differences were found as compared to the current DNA-derived protein sequence (300-EL>DV-301; 724G>V;738-AKADSV>PKRTVW-743); whereas the minor differences could be strain polymorphisms, the 6 aa difference may indicate two (in-and-out) closely-spaced DNA sequencing frameshift errors (Baouz, 2009).	b0026
ilvA	None	l-threonine dehydratase, biosynthetic; also known as threonine deaminase	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Isoleucine, Valine	L-threonine dehydratase, biosynthetic, PLP-dependent; also known as threonine deaminase; tetrameric	Isoleucine allosterically inhibits and valine allosterically activates IlvA, the first demonstration of end product inhibition for any enzyme (Umbarger, 1956). The activity and allosteric regulation of IlvA have been studied using purified enzymes in vitro (Grimminger, 1973; Calhoun, 1973; Koerner, 1975; Eisenstein, 1991; Eisenstein, 1994; Eisenstein, 1995; Chen, 2013). The Salmonella RidA(YjgF) is an enamine and imine deaminase required for the removal of the two unstable, toxic, tautomeric reactive intermediates, aminocrotonate and iminobutyrate, which are produced during the IlvA-mediated, PLP-dependent threonine dehydratase reaction; producing 2-ketobutyrate and releasing ammonia in a hydrolysis reaction that may require catalysis, due either to the low water environment or immediate toxicity in the cell; IlvA also dehydrates serine to yield pyruvate via analogous enamine/imine intermediates, also removed by RidA (Lambrecht, 2012). The N-terminal sequence of cloned and overproduced IlvA shows that the fMet is clipped, but the natural ilvA RBS was not used so it is not Verified, but the ATG start is reliable based on comparisons to Salmonella; 95% of the purified enzyme had its N-terminus blocked (Eisenstein, 1991). IlvA has two tandem C-terminal ACT-like regulatory domains (PF00585) required for maximal activity (Grant, 2006; Yu, 2014).	b3772
ilvB	None	acetolactate synthase 2 large subunit	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Isoleucine, Valine	Acetolactate synthase 1 large subunit, valine-sensitive; acetohydroxy acid synthase I; heterotetrameric AHAS-I	Null	b3671
ilvC	None	ketol-acid reductoisomerase, NAD(P)-binding	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Isoleucine, Valine	Ketol-acid reductoisomerase	Null	b3774
ilvD	None	dihydroxyacid dehydratase	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Isoleucine, Valine	Dihydroxyacid dehydratase; homodimeric	IlvD contains a 4Fe-4S cluster that requires either IscA or SufA for proper assembly (Tan, 2009).	b3771
ilvE	None	branched-chain amino acid aminotransferase	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Isoleucine, Valine	Branched-chain amino acid aminotransferase; transaminase B; dimer of trimers	Two independent determinations found N-terminal Gly where a Thr is encoded, indicating a modification of Thr to Gly may have occured post-translationally.	b3770
ilvG'	ilvO	pseudogene, acetolactate synthase 2 large subunit, valine-insensitive	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction, acetolactate synthase 2 large subunit; valine-insensitive; acetohydroxy acid synthase II; heterotetrameric AHAS-II	A frameshift at codon 328, the defective ilvG allele present in MG1655 and other K-12 strains, has been hypothetically reconstructed and was probably acquired early during laboratory cultivation; the gene designation ilvO indicates a regulatory locus but ilvO mutations are actually alleles of the ilvG gene that correct or compensate for the original ilvG frameshift mutation (Favre, 1976; Baez, 1979; Smith, 1979; Subrahmanyam, 1980a; Berg, 1980; Lawther, 1981; Lawther, 1981; Gray, 1981; Lawther, 1982; Wek, 1987; Lopes, 1989; Burns, 1995; Parekh, 1997). The corresponding Salmonella IlvG N-terminus was Verified by protein sequencing, supporting this start site for E. coli (Schloss, 1985). The N-terminus of overexpressed E. coli IlvG was also sequenced, but the native RBS was not used. In E. coli strains with a functional ilvG, no ptsN phenotypes are seen, indicating that perhaps ptsN is not a real nitrogen source regulator (Reaves, 2011).	b4488
ilvH	brnP	acetolactate synthase 3, small subunit, valine-sensitive	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Isoleucine, Valine	Acetolactate synthase 3 small regulatory subunit; acetohydroxy acid synthase III; heterotetrameric AHAS-III	The IlvH small subunit is required for full activity and valine-sensitivity of the IlvIH holoenzyme; IlvI alone exhibits only 5% of the holoenzyme activity (Vyazmensky, 1996). In addition to the ACT-like domain, also found in acetolactate synthase small regulatory subunit proteins IlvM and IlvN, IlvH has an additional C-terminal tandem ferridoxin domain of unknown function (Mendel, 2003; Kaplun, 2006). The stoichiometry of the acetolactate synthase 3 holoenzyme is IlvI(2)IlvH(2), a dimer of dimers. The valine binding site is probably at the interface of the two IlvH subunits (Kaplun, 2006).	b0078
ilvI	None	acetolactate synthase 3 large subunit	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Isoleucine, Valine	Acetolactate synthase 3 large subunit, valine-sensitive; acetohydroxy acid synthase III; heterotetrameric AHAS-III	Null	b0077
ilvM	None	acetolactate synthase 2 small subunit	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Isoleucine, Valine	Acetolactate synthase 2 small regulatory subunit; acetohydroxy acid synthase II; heterotetrameric AHAS-II	The Salmonella IlvM N-terminal sequence (Schloss et al., 1985) and spacing to the RBS indicate the first ATG is used. ACT-like domain (Grant, 2006).	b3769
ilvN	None	acetolactate synthase 1 small subunit	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Isoleucine, Valine	Acetolactate synthase 1 small regulatory subunit; acetohydroxy acid synthase I; heterotetrameric AHAS-I	Null	b3670
ilvY	None	transcriptional activator of ilvC; autorepressor	Regulator; Amino acid biosynthesis: Isoleucine, Valine	Transcriptional activator for ilvC	LysR family.	b3773
infA	bypA1	translation initiation factor IF-1	Factor; Proteins - translation and modification	Translation initiation factor IF-1	IF-1 also acts as transcription antiterminator and has RNA chaperone activity in vivo and in vitro (Phadtare, 2007). The infA and serW promoter regions bind ArcA and infA expression is activated by ArcA (Federowicz, 2014).	b0884
infB	gicD, ssyG	translation initiation factor IF-2	Factor; Proteins - translation and modification	Translation initiation factor IF-2	HT_Cmplx30_Mem: ClpB+DnaK+InfB+RpsA.	b3168
infC	fit, srjA	translation initiation factor IF-3	Factor; Proteins - translation and modification	Translation initiation factor IF-3; unusual AUU start codon	HT_Cmplx17_Mem: InfC+RpsG.	b1718
intD	int	DLP12 prophage; putative phage integrase	IS, phage, Tn; Phage or Prophage Related	Integrase gene within defective prophage DLP12	Null	b0537
ispA	None	geranyltranstransferase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Menaquinone, ubiquinone	Farnesyl diphosphate synthase, isoprenoid biosynthesis	Null	b0421
katE	None	catalase HPII, heme d-containing	Enzyme; Detoxification	Catalase HPII, heme d-containing; hydroperoxidase II; response to oxidative stress; chromate resistance	Cys438 may be blocked with a hemithioacetal group.	b1732
rpoS	abrD, appR, csi2, dpeB, katF, nur, otsX, sigS	RNA polymerase, sigma S (sigma 38) factor	Enzyme; Global regulatory functions	RNA polymerase subunit, stress and stationary phase sigma S; sigma 38	pgsA mutants are non-motile due to elevated RpoS levels that repress flhDC transcription; pgsA3 multicopy suppressers gadW, metE and nudL(yeaB) act by increasing RpoS levels (Uchiyama, 2010). Polyamine modulon (Igarashi, 2006).	b2741
katG	None	catalase-peroxidase HPI, heme b-containing	Enzyme; Detoxification	Catalase-peroxidase HPI, heme b-containing; hydroperoxidase I	KatG has both catalase and broad-spectrum peroxidase activities. With AhpCF, KatG protects aerobic, phosphate-starved cells from oxidative damage. N-terminus is reportedly blocked (Triggs-Raine et al, 1988.) Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004). KatG is a tellurite reductase (Calderon, 2006). Overexpression of YchF causes hydrogen peroxide hypersensitivity probably due to direct binding and inhibition of the catalase-peroxidase KatG by YchF, dependent on the ATPase activity of YchF and regulated by the YchF phosphorylation state at Ser16; ychF transcription is repressed by OxyR (Wenk, 2012).	b3942
kbl	None	glycine C-acetyltransferase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	2-amino-3-ketobutyrate CoA ligase	Null	b3617
kdpA	kac	potassium translocating ATPase, subunit A	Enzyme; Transport of small molecules: Cations	Potassium-translocating ATPase, A subunit; high-affinity potassium transport	ArcA activates ybfA gene transcription and represses the divergently transcribed kdp operon by binding to the same operator site (Federowicz, 2014).	b0698
kdpB	kac	potassium translocating ATPase, subunit B	Enzyme; Transport of small molecules: Cations	Potassium-translocating ATPase, B subunit; high-affinity potassium transport	ArcA activates ybfA gene transcription and represses the divergently transcribed kdp operon by binding to the same operator site (Federowicz, 2014). KdpB contains a putative phosphatase HAD domain: residues 301-539.	b0697
kdpC	kac	potassium translocating ATPase, subunit C	Enzyme; Transport of small molecules: Cations	Potassium-translocating ATPase, C subunit; high-affinity potassium transport	ArcA activates ybfA gene transcription and represses the divergently transcribed kdp operon by binding to the same operator site (Federowicz, 2014).	b0696
kdpD	kac	fused sensory histidine kinase in two-component regulatory system with KdpE: signal sensing protein	Enzyme; Global regulatory functions	Sensor kinase for the kdp operon; two-component system; has autokinase activity and KdpE-directed phosphotransferase and phosphatase activities; responds to ionic strength, ATP and potassium; dimeric	ArcA activates ybfA gene transcription and represses the divergently transcribed kdp operon by binding to the same operator site (Federowicz, 2014). Inhibition of KdpD phosphatase activity leads to an accumulation of phospho-KdpE and activation of kdpFABC transcription. KdpD phosphatase activity directed at KdpE was initiially suggested to be inhibited by turgor pressure, but this has been refuted (Hamann, 2008). Dephosphorylated PTS system EIIA(Ntr) protein PtsN binds to and stimulates sensor kinase KdpD activity, increasing the levels of the cognate phosphorylated response regulator KdpE (Lüttmann, 2009). Since high K+ concentrations lower phosphoryated KdpE, it was suggested that high intracellular potassium downregulates the KdpD autophosphoryation activity, resulting in less phosphotransferance to KdpE (Heermann, 2009; Lüttmann, 2009). A salt shock increases ATP concentrations and probably stimulates KdpD phosphatase activity since a deletion of the ATP-binding site of KdpD deregulates its phosphatase activity (Ohwada, 1987; Jung, 1998).	b0695
kdpE	None	response regulator in two-component regulatory system with KdpD	Regulator; Global regulatory functions	Response regulator of kdp operon; two-component system phosphorylation state and activity modulated by sensor kinase KdpD; responds to ionic strength, ATP and potassium 	ArcA activates ybfA gene transcription and represses the divergently transcribed kdp operon by binding to the same operator site (Federowicz, 2014). Inhibition of KdpD phosphatase activity leads to an accumulation of phospho-KdpE and activation of kdpFABC transcription. KdpD phosphatase activity directed at KdpE was initially suggested to be inhibited by turgor pressure, but this has been refuted (Hamann, 2008). Dephosphorylated PTS system EIIA(Ntr) protein PtsN binds to and stimulates sensor kinase KdpD activity, increasing the levels of the cognate phosphorylated response regulator KdpE (Lüttmann, 2009). Since high K+ concentrations lower phosphoryated KdpE, it was suggested that high intracellular potassium downregulates the KdpD autophosphoryation activity, resulting in less phosphotransferance to KdpE (Heermann, 2009; Lüttmann, 2009). A salt shock increases ATP concentrations and probably stimulates KdpD phosphatase activity since a deletion of the ATP-binding site of KdpD deregulates its phosphatase activity (Ohwada, 1987; Jung, 1998).	b0694
kdsA	None	3-deoxy-D-manno-octulosonate 8-phosphate synthase	Enzyme; Surface polysaccharides & antigens	3-deoxy-D-manno-octulosonate 8-phosphate (KDO8-P) synthase; LPS biosynthesis	kdsA srlQ double mutants are non-viable and lack KDO; multicopy msbA, or unknown chromsomal mutation(s) in suppressed KDO-null strain KPM22, permit viability without KDO-containing LPS (Meredith, 2006).	b1215
kdsB	None	3-deoxy-manno-octulosonate cytidylyltransferase	Enzyme; Surface polysaccharides & antigens	3-deoxy-manno-octulosonate cytidylyltransferase; CMP-KDO synthase (CKS); LPS biosynthesis	E. coli K-12 only has the L-CKS isozyme involved in LPS biosynthesis. The K-CKS isozyme KpsU is specific for K5 group II capsule biosynthesis, is 45% identical to KdsB, and has been characterized from E. coli K5 isolate #2980 (Genbank:X74567, UniProtKB: P42216; PDB:1H7E).	b0918
waaA	kdtA	3-deoxy-D-manno-octulosonic-acid transferase (KDO transferase)	Enzyme; Surface polysaccharides & antigens	3-deoxy-D-manno-octulosonate(Kdo)-lipid A transferase	WaaA adds 2 Kdo residues to lipid IVA. waaA is an essential gene. Mutagenesis eliminated the ATG at codon 52 as a start codon (Belunis, 1992).	b3633
kefC	trkC	potassium:proton antiporter	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Cations	NEM-activatable K+/H+ antiporter	Null	b0047
kgtP	witA	alpha-ketoglutarate transporter	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	Alpha-ketoglutarate permease	KgtP overexpression reduces intracellular arabinose, but not xylose, concentration; other compounds were not tested (Koita, 2012). Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS).	b2587
rsmA	ksgA	16S rRNA m(6)A1518, m(6)A1519 dimethyltransferase, SAM-dependent	Enzyme; rRNA modification; drug/analog sensitivity	16S rRNA m(6)A1518, m(6)A1519 dimethyltransferase, SAM-dependent; mutant is kasugamycin resistant; multicopy suppressor of era(Cs)	RsmA(KsgA) dimethylates two adjacent 16S rRNA adenosines. rsmA(ksgA) deletion mutants grow more slowly than an isogenic wildtype strain at 20C (Connolly, 2008). RsmA(KsgA) has a novel antimutagenic DNA glycosylase/AP lyase activity for a C that is mispaired with an oxidized T (Zhang-Akiyama, 2008).	b0051
lacA	None	thiogalactoside acetyltransferase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Thiogalactoside acetyltransferase	LacA contains 8 hexapeptide repeats. The initiator methionine is only partially cleaved (Fowler, 1985). LacA confers selective advantage to cells growing on beta-galactosides in the presence of non-metabolizable analogs, presumably by acetylating the analogs and blocking their uptake (Andrews, 1976).	b0342
lacI	None	lactose-inducible lac operon transcriptional repressor	Regulator; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Transcriptional repressor of lac operon	Null	b0345
lacY	None	lactose permease	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	Lactose permease; galactoside permease	Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS). PDB 1M2U is a model not a crystal structure.	b0343
lacZ	None	beta-D-galactosidase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Beta-D-galactosidase	The lacZ gene is repressed during biofilm formation. LacZ has an Ig-like domain: pfam PF00703 aligns to residues 221-334. ebgA, uidA and lacZ are paralogs. Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004).	b0344
lamB	malB, malL	maltose outer membrane porin (maltoporin)	IS, phage, Tn; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	Maltoporin, maltose high-affinity uptake system; phage lambda receptor protein	LamB also facilitates the diffusion of maltooligosaccharides, i.e maltodextrin. MalT regulon. Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004).	b4036
lepA	None	back-translocating elongation factor EF4, GTPase	Factor; Proteins - translation and modification	Back-translocating Elongation Factor EF4, GTPase; required for efficient and accurate protein synthesis	EF4 is stored at the membrane and released into the cytoplasm at high ionic strength or low temperature (Pech, 2011). Although EF4 improves translational accuracy, it can not reverse paromomycin-induced errors (Qin, 2006). EF4 is a widely conserved protein, the first four domains are related to EF-G domains I, II, III, and V (Qin, 2006). EF4 overexpression is toxic (Qin 2006). EF4 (LepA) is in the lepAB operon but has no known role in signal peptidase I (LepB) activity.	b2569
lepB	lep	leader peptidase (signal peptidase I)	Enzyme; Protein, peptide secretion	Signal peptidase I; SPI; responsible for type I signal cleavages of periplasmic, OM, some IM, and extracellular proteins	LepB has a blocked N-terminus. False positive lipoprotein prediction, shown to have no signal peptide. Targetted by SRP/FtsY to Sec/YidC for membrane insertion.	b2568
leuO	None	global transcription factor	Putative regulator; Amino acid biosynthesis: Leucine	Pleiotropic transcriptional regulator; regulates dsrA; relieves bgl silencing, multi-copy represses cadC	LysR-family. leuO is upstream and divergent of the leuABCD operon. LeuO is required for recovery of a relA1 strain from starvation for brached-chain amino acids. In Salmonella, LeuO relieves leuABCD silencing mediated by an AT-rich silencer sequence between leuO and leuA. In Salmonella, LeuO expression is activated by an ilvHI-leuO-leuA promoter relay mechanism mediated by DNA supercoiling, possibly explaining the ppGpp-dependent increase in E. coli LeuO expression in stationary phase as an indirect effect of ppGpp stimulating the expression of Lrp, an ilvHI activator.	b0076
leuS	None	leucyl-tRNA synthetase	Enzyme; Aminoacyl tRNA synthetases, tRNA modification	Leucine--tRNA ligase	6/458 LeuS peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is not removed (Maillet, 2007).	b0642
lexA	exrA, spr, tsl, umuA	transcriptional repressor of SOS regulon	Regulator; Global regulatory functions	Global regulator (repressor) for SOS regulon; dimeric	LexA autocleavage, stimulated by RecA, of the first 84 aa of LexA removes the DNA binding region and is required to activate the SOS response. LexA recognition site: CTGTATATATATACAG. 	b4043
ligA	dnaL, lig, lop, pdeC	DNA ligase, NAD(+)-dependent	Enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	DNA ligase A, NAD(+)-dependent	ligA is an essential gene. LigA is inhibited by nicotinamide mononucleotide, arylamino compounds and pyridochromanones.	b2411
lit	None	T4 phage exclusion protein; cell death peptidase, e14 prophage	Membrane; Phage or Prophage Related	T4 phage exclusion protein; cell death peptidase, e14 prophage	Constitutive expression of the e14 prophage gene lit by a promoter-up mutation blocks late T4 gene expression causing T4 phage exclusion (Cooley, 1979; Kao, 1987; Kao, 1988). Lit-mediated T4 phage exclusion depends upon translation of the gol (growth on lit) region of the T4 capsid gene 23 to make a polypeptide segment that binds to EF-Tu and enables EF-Tu proteolysis by Lit between residues Gly60 and Ile61, causing global inhibition of translation and cell death prior to the translation of late genes and production of T4 virions, blocking viral transmission (Bergsland, 1990; Yu, 1994; Georgiou, 1998; Bingham, 2000; Copeland, 2004). Overproduced Lit protein is enriched in mini-cell inner membrane fractions (Kao, 1998). The mode of Lit protein inner membrane binding is uncertain because the prediction of transmembrane domains for Lit is ambiguous as zero, one and two transmembrane domains have been variously predicted, but generally most programs do not predict any transmembrane domains. The known substrate for Lit proteolysis, EF-Tu, is located in the cytoplasm.	b1139
livF	None	branched-chain amino acid ABC transporter ATPase	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	Branched-chain amino acid ABC transporter ATPase	The LivF, LivG, and LivH N-termini have been confirmed by protein sequencing, but the actual sequence data was not provided so it is not known if the intitial Met is cleaved or not; therefore LivF, LivG, and LivH are not in the Verified Set (Adams, 1990).	b3454
livG	hrbB, hrbC, hrbD	branched-chain amino acid ABC transporter ATPase	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	Branched-chain amino acid ABC transporter ATPase	The LivF, LivG, and LivH N-termini have been confirmed by protein sequencing, but the actual sequence data was not provided so it is not known if the intitial Met is cleaved or not; therefore LivF, LivG, and LivH are not in the Verified Set (Adams, 1990).	b3455
livH	hrbB, hrbC, hrbD	branched-chain amino acid ABC transporter permease	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	Branched-chain amino acid ABC transporter permease	The LivF, LivG, and LivH N-termini have been confirmed by protein sequencing, but the actual sequence data was not provided so it is not known if the intitial Met is cleaved or not; therefore LivF, LivG, and LivH are not in the Verified Set (Adams, 1990).	b3457
livJ	hrbB, hrbC, hrbD	branched-chain amino acid ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	Branched-chain amino acid ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein; LIV-I system; also involved in phenylalanine accumulation	After four hours of Zn(II) stress, LivJ protein levels decreased (Easton, 2006).	b3460
livK	hrbB, hrbC, hrbD	leucine transporter subunit	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	Leucine-specific binding protein, periplasmic, high-affinity transport for leucine; LS system; also involved in isoleucine, valine, and phenylalanine accumulation	Null	b3458
livM	None	branched-chain amino acid ABC transporter permease	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	Branched-chain amino acid ABC transporter permease	Null	b3456
lon	capR, deg, dir, lonA, lopA, muc	DNA-binding ATP-dependent protease La	Enzyme; Global regulatory functions	DNA-binding, ATP-dependent protease LA; lon mutants form long cells	Lon dependent lethality is due to induction of yefM-yoeB toxin/antitoxin pair.	b0439
lpd	dhl, lpdA	dihydrolipoyl dehydrogenase; E3 component of pyruvate and 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenases complexes; glycine cleavage system L protein; dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Pyruvate dehydrogenase	Dihydrolipoyl dehydrogenase, NADH-dependent; E3 component of pyruvate and 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenases complexes; glycine cleavage system L protein; dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase; binds Zn(II)	The pyruvate dehydrogenase holoenzyme is AceE(24)+AceF(24)+Lpd(12). HT_Cmplx3_Cyt: AceF+Lpd.	b0116
lpp	mlpA, mulI	murein lipoprotein	Membrane; Murein sacculus, peptidoglycan	Murein lipoprotein; Braun's lipoprotein	Lpp binds peptidoglycan, one third has a covalent bond to murein. Free Lpp is an integral outer membrane protein with the C-terminus exposed on the cell surface (Cowles, 2011; Bernstein, 2011). Lpp is required for cell membrane integrity. Pal restores the outer membrane integrity of an lpp mutant, but overproduced Lpp has no effect on a pal mutant phenotype. The first 20 aa of Lpp are a type II signal peptide. The N-terminus of the unprocessed precursor was sequenced. The lipid attachment to C21 was confirmed.	b1677
lpxA	None	UDP-N-acetylglucosamine acetyltransferase	Enzyme; Surface polysaccharides & antigens	Lipid A synthesis, UDP-N-acetylglucosamine acyltransferase	LpxA contains 24 hexapeptide repeats.	b0181
lpxB	pgsB	tetraacyldisaccharide-1-P synthase	Enzyme; Macromolecule metabolism: Lipopolysaccharide	Lipid A disaccharide synthase	The lpxB1 mutation is E326K, the result of a change in codon 326 from GAA to AAA (C.R.H. Raetz, pers. comm., 4/03, Duke Univ.). LpxB and GlpD associate.	b0182
lrp	alsB, ihb, livR, lrs, lss, lstR, mbf, oppI, rblA	leucine-responsive global transcriptional regulator	Regulator; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	Global regulatory protein, Leu responsive; regulator of high-affinity branched-chain amino acid transport system; octameric or hexadecameric functional state	Feast/famine regulatory protein. Homodimers bind adjacent DNA binding sites to form functional octameric state. Lrp wraps DNA and probably plays a role in chromatin organization.	b0889
lspA	None	prolipoprotein signal peptidase (signal peptidase II)	Enzyme; Protein, peptide secretion	Prolipoprotein signal peptidase, signal peptidase II; SPII	Null	b0027
lysA	None	diaminopimelate decarboxylase, PLP-binding	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Lysine	Diaminopimelate decarboxylase	9/80 LysA peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed (Maillet, 2007).	b2838
lysC	apk	lysine-sensitive aspartokinase 3	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Lysine	Lysine-sensitive aspartokinase 3	Mutations in an L box riboswitch regulated by free lysine is in the lysC mRNA 5' UTR confer resistance to S-(2-aminoethyl)-L-cysteine (AEC) by derepressing lysine biosynthesis and outcompeting AEC inhibition of LysRS (Ataide, 2007). The lysC riboswitch also regulates lysC mRNA decay by sequestering RNase E cleavage sites (Caron, 2012).	b4024
lysR	None	transcriptional activator of lysA; autorepressor	Regulator; Amino acid biosynthesis: Lysine	Transcriptional activator of lysA; autorepressor	Null	b2839
lysS	asuD, herC	lysine tRNA synthetase, constitutive	Enzyme; Aminoacyl tRNA synthetases, tRNA modification	Lysine--tRNA ligase, constitutive	Mutants have reduced OM vesiculation (McBroom, 2006).	b2890
lysU	None	lysine tRNA synthetase, inducible	Enzyme; Aminoacyl tRNA synthetases, tRNA modification	Lysine--tRNA ligase, heat inducible; Ap4A and Ap3A synthase	Null	b4129
malE	malJ	maltose transporter subunit	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	Maltose-binding protein, periplasmic; MBP; substrate recognition for active transport of and chemotaxis toward maltose and maltodextrin	Biofilm microarray result was validated with RT-PCR. MalE binds maltose and maltodextrin and mediates chemotaxis through the Tar chemoreceptor. MalT regulon. creBC regulon. Alkali-inducible. Upregulated in biofilms. Downregulated during cold-shock in a pnp-dependent way. Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004).	b4034
malF	malJ	maltose transporter subunit	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	Maltose transport complex, inner membrane-spanning subunit	The maltose transport complex MalFGK(2) also transports maltodextrin. MalT regulon.	b4033
malG	malJ	maltose transporter subunit	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	Maltose transport complex, inner membrane-spanning subunit	The maltose transport complex MalFGK(2) also transports maltodextrin. MalT regulon.	b4032
malI	None	transcriptional repressor of Mal regulon	Regulator; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Maltose regulon regulatory protein	MalI, LacI, GalR and CytR are paralogs.	b1620
malK	None	maltose ABC transportor ATPase	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	Maltose transport complex, ATP-binding subunit	The inactive, ATP-bound form of MalK directly antagonizes the mal regulon activator MalT. The maltose transport complex MalFGK(2) also transports maltodextrin. Overexpression causes filamentous biofilm formation. MalT regulon.	b4035
malM	molA	maltose regulon periplasmic protein	Phenotype; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Periplasmic protein in malK operon, function unknown	Both precursor and processed forms are seen, but no protein sequencing was done. Periplasmic location was confirmed. MalT regulon. The first 26 aa of MalM are predicted to be a signal peptide.	b4037
malP	blu, malA	maltodextrin phosphorylase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Maltodextrin phosphorylase	MalT regulon.	b3417
malQ	malA	4-alpha-glucanotransferase (amylomaltase)	Enzyme; Degradation of polysaccharides	Amylomaltase	MalT regulon.	b3416
malT	malA	mal regulon transcriptional activator	Regulator; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	ATP-dependent transcriptional activator for the mal regulon	Activated by maltotriose and ATP to form active oligomers. Signal transduction ATPases with numerous domains (STAND) protein. ATP hydrolysis is not required for transcription activation (Richet, 1989), but is required to recycle back to the inactive form, which has ADP, not ATP bound (Marquenet, 2007). MalY (Clausen, 2000; Schreiber, 2000), MalK (Reyes, 1988; Panagiotidis, 1998; Bohm, 2002) and Aes (Joly, 2002) negatively regulate MalT activity by binding and blocking maltotriose activation. MalT is required for phage lambda sensitivity.	b3418
malX	None	maltose and glucose-specific PTS enzyme IIB component and IIC component	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	PTS enzyme II homolog; malI regulated	Crp activated.	b1621
malY	None	PLP-dependent beta-cystathionase and maltose regulon regulator	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Antagonist of MalT transcriptional activator of maltose regulon, binds MalT in absence of maltotriose; cysteine desulfhydrase	Null	b1622
malZ	None	maltodextrin glucosidase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Maltodextrin glucosidase	An alternative malZ ATG start codon that precedes the annotated start codon might be utilized to form a 605 aa primary MalZ translation product. MalT regulon.	b0403
manA	pmi	mannose-6-phosphate isomerase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Mannose-6-phosphate isomerase	Null	b1613
manX	gptB, mpt, ptsL, ptsX	fused mannose-specific PTS enzymes: IIA component/IIB component	Enzyme; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	Mannose permease, EIIAB component; phosphotransferase system	HT_Cmplx16_Mem: ManX+ManY+ManZ.	b1817
manY	pel, ptsP, ptsX	mannose-specific enzyme IIC component of PTS	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	Mannose permease, EIIC component; phosphotransferase system	HT_Cmplx16_Mem: ManX+ManY+ManZ.	b1818
manZ	gptB, mpt, ptsM, ptsX	mannose-specific enzyme IID component of PTS	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	Mannose permease, EIID component; phosphotransferase system	HT_Cmplx16_Mem: ManX+ManY+ManZ.	b1819
map	pepM(S.t.)	methionine aminopeptidase	Enzyme; Proteins - translation and modification	Methionine aminopeptidase	Null	b0168
mazE	chpAI, chpR, tasA	antitoxin of the ChpA-ChpR toxin-antitoxin system	Phenotype; Not classified	MazE antitoxin, toxin is MazF	MazE and the MazE-MazF complex bind DNA in the mazEF promoter region.	b2783
mazG	None	nucleoside triphosphate pyrophosphohydrolase	Null	Nucleoside triphosphate pyrophosphohydrolase, non-specific; binds Era	Null	b2781
mcrA	rglA	putative 5-methylcytosine/5-hydroxymethylcytosine-specific restriction nuclease; 5-methylcytosine DNA binding protein	Putative enzyme; Phage or Prophage Related	Putative 5-methylcytosine-specific restriction nuclease; 5-methylcytosine DNA binding protein; e14 prophage gene	McrA restricts methylated phage lambda DNA while inducing the DNA damage response, an indicator of in vivo cleavage activity (Anton, 2004). Purified McrA specifically binds to but does not cut HpaII methylated DNA; McrA mediates in vivo restriction of 5-methyl and 5-hydroxymethylcytosine DNA at the specific DNA sequence C(m)CGG, but the mechanism is unclear since no in vitro DNA nuclease activity of McrA has been detected (Mulligan, 2008). A detailed analysis defined the McrA binding site as N(Y>R)m(5)CGR (Mulligan, 2010). McrA contains an intact C-terminal HNH nuclease domain (Pfam01844) and McrA may have nuclease activity in vivo, or it may have an unidentified partner nuclease protein. McrA has been predicted to be a polymorphic toxin (Zhang, 2012).	b1159
mcrB	rglB	5-methylcytosine-specific restriction enzyme McrBC, subunit McrB	Enzyme; Degradation of DNA	McrBC restriction endonuclease, catalytic subunit; 5-methylcytosine-specific; requires GTP, inhibited by ATP	McrB-S is an alternative product initiating at codon 162. McrB-S is seen in some overexpression constructs but has not yet been observed as a native protein. McrB-S has no known function.	b4346
mcrC	None	5-methylcytosine-specific restriction enzyme McrBC, subunit McrC	Enzyme; Degradation of DNA	McrBC restriction endonuclease, specificity subunit; 5-methylcytosine-specific; requires GTP, inhibited by ATP	Null	b4345
mdh	None	malate dehydrogenase, NAD(P)-binding	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: TCA cycle	Malate dehydrogenase, NAD-dependent	mdh gene expression is up-regulated by citrate during anaerobic growth to assist in citrate catabolism (Yamamoto, 2008). Mdh is elevated 4X during growth at 4C (enabled by Oleispira antarctica Cpn10/60 transgene). Deletion of mdh induces growth defects on all substrates except glucose. After four hours of Zn(II) stress, protein levels increased (Easton, 2006).	b3236
melA	mel-7	alpha-galactosidase, NAD(P)-binding	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Alpha-galactosidase	Null	b4119
melB	mel-4	melibiose:sodium symporter	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	Melibiose permease; thiomethylgalactoside permease II	Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS).	b4120
menD	None	2-succinyl-5-enolpyruvyl-6-hydroxy-3-cyclohexene-1-carboxylate synthase; SEPHCHC synthase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Menaquinone, ubiquinone	SEPHCHC synthase, menaquinone biosynthesis; 2-succinyl-5-enolpyruvyl-6-hydroxy-3-cyclohexene-1-carboxylate synthase	MenD was mistakenly thought to be SHCHC synthase (MenH) (Jiang, 2007).	b2264
mepA	None	murein DD-endopeptidase	Enzyme; Murein sacculus, peptidoglycan	Murein DD-endopeptidase, penicillin-insensitive	Null	b2328
metA	None	homoserine O-transsuccinylase	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Methionine	Homoserine O-transsuccinylase; also called homoserine O-succinyltransferase	MetA catalyzes the first step in methionine biosynthesis and is proteolytically unstable. Upregulated by GSNO in defined medium (aerobic).	b4013
metB	met-1	cystathionine gamma-synthase, PLP-dependent	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Methionine	Cystathionine gamma-synthase; homotetrameric	Upregulated by GSNO in defined medium.	b3939
metC	None	cystathionine beta-lyase, PLP-dependent	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Methionine	Cystathionine beta-lyase; homotetrameric; cysteine desulfhydrase; putative alanine racemase	MetJ mutants overproducing MetC restore D-alanine production, presumably due to an intrinsic alanine racemase activity of MetC (Kang, 2011). The Flint et al. N-terminal sequence is lacking the first four amino acids, probably due to in vitro proteolysis.	b3008
metE	metB12	5-methyltetrahydropteroyltriglutamate-homocysteine S-methyltransferase	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Methionine	Methionine synthase, cobalamin-independent; 5-methyltetrahydropteroyltriglutamate-homocysteine methyltransferase; binds Zn(II)	pgsA mutants are non-motile due to elevated RpoS levels that repress flhDC transcription; pgsA3 multicopy suppressers gadW, metE and nudL(yeaB) act by increasing RpoS levels (Uchiyama, 2010).	b3829
metF	None	5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	5,10-Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase	Upregulated by GSNO in defined medium. 11/243 MetF peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed (Maillet, 2007).	b3941
metG	None	methionyl-tRNA synthetase	Enzyme; Aminoacyl tRNA synthetases, tRNA modification	Methionine--tRNA ligase	metG is an essential gene.	b2114
metH	None	homocysteine-N5-methyltetrahydrofolate transmethylase, B12-dependent	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Methionine	Methionine synthase, cobalamin-dependent; 5-methyltetrahydrofolate-homocysteine methyltransferase; binds Zn(II)	Null	b4019
metJ	None	transcriptional repressor, S-adenosylmethionine-binding	Regulator; Amino acid biosynthesis: Methionine	Methionine regulon repressor, SAM co-repressor; sulfoximine and methylmethionine sensitivity	MetJ mutants overproducing MetC restore D-alanine production, presumably due to an intrinsic alanine racemase activity of MetC (Kang, 2011). metJ is upregulated by GSNO in defined medium (aerobic). MetJ-SAM also represses the SAM biosynthesic enzymes.	b3938
metK	metX	S-adenosylmethionine synthetase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	S-adenosylmethionine synthase; methionine adenosyltransferase; ethionine sensitivity; essential gene	The adjacent ORF yqgD has been removed because it is very unlikely to be a gene; the limited conservation with Salmonella is apparently due to a pseudotranslation of the conserved metK CRP site, promoter and the metK 5' UTR.	b2942
metL	metM	Bifunctional aspartokinase/homoserine dehydrogenase 2	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Methionine	Bifunctional aspartokinase/homoserine dehydrogenase 2	Null	b3940
metR	None	methionine biosynthesis regulon transcriptional regulator	Regulator; Amino acid biosynthesis: Methionine	Positive regulatory gene for metE and metH; autogenous regulation	metR mutants require methionine due to insufficient expression of metE and metH (Urbanowski, 1987; Maxon, 1989). Upregulated by GSNO in defined medium.	b3828
mglA	mglP	methyl-galactoside ABC transporter ATPase	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	Methyl-galactoside ABC transporter ATPase	Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004).	b2149
mglB	None	methyl-galactoside transporter subunit	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	D-galactose-, D-glucose-binding protein, periplasmic; substrate recognition for transport and chemotaxis; binds calcium	MglB binds D-galactose and D-glucose and mediates chemotaxis through the Trg chemoreceptor.	b2150
mglC	mglP	methyl-galactoside transporter subunit	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	Methyl-galactoside transport and galactose taxis	Null	b2148
miaA	trpX	delta(2)-isopentenylpyrophosphate tRNA-adenosine transferase	Enzyme; Aminoacyl tRNA synthetases, tRNA modification	Dimethylallyl diphosphate:tRNA dimethylallyltransferase; 2-methylthio-N6-(dimethylallyl)adenosine tRNA hypermodification	Null	b4171
minC	minB	inhibitor of FtsZ ring polymerization	Factor; Cell division	Inhibitor of FtsZ ring polymerization	MinCD oscillates (migrates) between coating one half of the cell's membrane (minE ring to pole) to coating the other half every 40 secs, and this may help to identify the cell center. MinCD forms membrane-associated coiled arrays on the cytoplasmic face of the inner membrane which are more concentrated at the poles.	b1176
minD	minB	inhibitor of FtsZ ring polymerization; chromosome-membrane tethering protein; membrane ATPase of the MinCDEE system	Enzyme; Cell division	Inhibitor of FtsZ ring polymerization; chromosome-membrane tethering protein; membrane ATPase that activates MinC	MinD binds DNA, tethers it to the membrane in an ATP-dependent manner, and is involved in chromosome segreagation (Di Ventura, 2013). The membrane localization of MinD is mediated by an 8-12 residue C-terminal motif, the membrane targeting sequence (MTS), mutations in this region prevent membrane localization, but not MinC binding. MinD contains switch I and II regions (regions that undergo nucleotide-dependent conformational changes responsible for interactions with their partners) involved in MinC interactions. MinCD oscillates (migrates) between coating one half of the cell's membrane (minE ring to pole) to coating the other half every 40 secs, and this may help to identify the cell center. Overexpression of MinD causes filamentous biofilm formation. MinCD forms membrane-associated coiled arrays on the cytoplasmic face of the inner membranewhich are more concentrated at the poles.	b1175
minE	minB	cell division topological specificity factor	Factor; Cell division	Blocks MinCD inhibition of FtsZ polymerization at cell center; forms membrane-associated coiled arrays in a ring at the cell center	Overexpression causes filamentous biofilm formation and non-motility. 10/85 MinE peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed (Maillet, 2007).	b1174
groL	groEL, mopA	Cpn60 chaperonin GroEL, large subunit of GroESL	Factor; Chaperones	Chaperonin Cpn60; phage morphogenesis; GroESL large subunit GroEL, weak ATPase; binds Ap4A	groL is an essential gene (Fayet, 1989). The groL mutants in the Keio collection have been shown to harbor an intact copy of groL in addition to the deletion allele (Yamamoto, 2009). Cells deficient in GroEL and GroES lyse due to inability to produce cell wall as a result of the reduced level of DapA, the first enzyme in the DAP synthesis pathway (McLennan, 1998). Growth below 8C is impaired due to GroESL inactivation and can be rescued by transgenic Oleispira antarctica Cpn10/60 (Ferrer, 2003). Overproduction of GroESL can suppress tig/dnaK synthetic lethality at 30 degrees C. GroL lysines K34, K51, K117, K277, K321 and K390 can be modified to N6-succinyllysine (Zhang, 2011). GroL lysines K42, K117, K122, and K425 can be modified to N6-acetyllysine (Yu, 2008; Zhang, 2009). The groSL promoter region binds FNR and groSL expression is repressed by FNR (Federowicz, 2014).	b4143
groS	groES, mopB, TabB	Cpn10 chaperonin GroES, small subunit of GroESL	Factor; Chaperones	Chaperonin Cpn10; GroESL small subunit GroES; phage morphogenesis	groS is an essential gene (Fayet, 1989). Cells deficient in GroES and GroEL lyse due to inability to produce cell walls as a result of the reduced level of DapA, the first enzyme in the DAP synthesis pathway (McLennan, 1998). Growth below 8C is impaired due to GroESL inactivation and can be rescued by transgenic Oleispira antarctica Cpn10/60. Overproduction of GroESL can suppress tig/dnaK synthetic lethality at 30 degrees C (Ferrer, 2003). Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004). GroS lysine K34 can be modified to N6-succinyllysine (Zhang, 2011). The groSL promoter region binds FNR and groSL expression is repressed by FNR (Federowicz, 2014).	b4142
motA	flaJ	proton conductor component of flagella motor	Phenotype; Chemotaxis and mobility	H+-driven stator protein of flagellar rotation	Flagellar regulon. MotAB stators interact with the FliG rotor to generate torque.	b1890
motB	flaJ	protein that enables flagellar motor rotation	Structural component; Chemotaxis and mobility	H+-driven stator protein of flagellar rotation	Flagellar regulon. MotAB stators interact with the FliG rotor to generate torque.	b1889
mprA	emrR	transcriptional repressor of microcin B17 synthesis and multidrug efflux	Regulator; Plasmid-related functions	emrAB repressor, also regulates microcin synthesis; binds uncouplers DNP, CCCP, FCCP	Null	b2684
mraY	murX	phospho-N-acetylmuramoyl-pentapeptide transferase	Enzyme; Murein sacculus, peptidoglycan	UDP-N-acetylmuramoyl-pentapeptide:undecaprenyl-PO4 phosphatase	The aspartic acid residues DD115, D116, and D267 are necessary for catalysis. The model suggested indicates that D115 and D116 chelate the Mg2+ cofactor, which in turn binds the pyrophosphate bridge of the UDP-MurNAc-pentapeptide, and D267 acts as the catalytic nucleophile. otherPDB(A.aeolicus): 4J72 (Chung, 2013).	b0087
mrcB	pbpF, ponB	fused glycosyl transferase and transpeptidase	Enzyme; Murein sacculus, peptidoglycan	Murein polymerase, PBP1B; bifunctional murein transglycosylase and transpeptidase; penicillin-binding protein 1B; dimeric	LpoB binds to and stimulates PBP1B (MrcB) to synthesize more peptidoglycan (murein) (Paradis-Bleau, 2010; Typas, 2010; Young, 2010). The LpoB-PBP1B complex may contribute to OM constriction during cell division (Typas, 2010). MrcB is part of a complex with MltA and MipA. The N-terminal transglycosylase activity polymerizes the glycan backbone and is penicillin-insensitive. The C-terminal transpeptidase activity crosslinks the muramic peptides and is penicillin-sensitive. Full length MrcB is the alpha isoform. A second in vivo ATG start at codon 46 produces the 799 aa gamma isoform. Murein polymerase is an essential function satisfied by either MrcA or MrcB. Mutants have elevated OM vesiculation (McBroom, 2006). MrcB is a membrane-bound periplasmic enzyme that has two membrane association sites: hydropathic residues 64-87 and a region somewhere between residues 88 and 250 that is not apparent in hydropathy plots (Edelman, 1987; Wang, 1996).	b0149
mrdA	pbpA	penicillin-binding protein 2, transpeptidase involved in peptidoglycan synthesis	Enzyme; Cell division	Penicillin-binding protein PBP2; transpeptidase recruited by cognate SEDS protein MrdB; mecillinam resistance	MrdA is a periplasmic protein with an N-terminal uncleavable signal-anchor (anchored by residues 21-43).	b0635
mrdB	rodA	cell wall shape-determining protein	Phenotype; Cell division	Affects cell shape, mecillinam sensitivity; recruits cognate transpetidase MrdA; SEDS protein	Null	b0634
mreB	envB, mon, rodY	cell wall structural complex MreBCD, actin-like component MreB	Phenotype; Cell division	Cell wall structural actin-like protein in MreBCD complex; mecillinam resistance protein	The cytoskeletal helical structure of MreB is reported to be an artifact of YFP labeling (Swulius, 2012). Overexpression causes abnormal biofilm architecture, reduces motility and inhibits cell division. mreB is in an operon with mreCD and the Mre gene products form an essential membrane-bound complex responsible for cell morphology. Perhaps relevant to the controversial sitution in E. coli, in B. subtilis EF-Tu is found in a static helical structure at the inner face of the cytoplasmic membrane co-localized with MreB; MreB and EF-Tu interact in vivo and in vitro; reduction of intracellular EF-Tu affects cell shape but not translation efficiency; EF-Tu intracellular protofilaments may serve as tracks for dynamic MreB shape-determining filaments (Defeu, 2010). Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004).	b3251
mreC	None	cell wall structural complex MreBCD transmembrane component MreC	Structural component; Murein sacculus, peptidoglycan	Cell division and growth; mecillinam resistance; rod shape-determining protein	 In operon with mreBD and the gene products form an essential membrane-bound complex responsible for cell morphology. OtherPDB (L. monocytogenes): 2J5U.	b3250
mreD	None	cell wall structural complex MreBCD transmembrane component MreD	Structural component; Murein sacculus, peptidoglycan	Mecillinam resistance; rod shape-determining protein	 In operon with mreBC and the gene products form an essential membrane-bound complex responsible for cell morphology	b3249
mrp	apbC(S.t.)	antiporter inner membrane protein	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Putative Fe-S scaffold protein, P-loop ATPase	Salmonella typhimurium Mrp(ApbC) is a [4Fe-4S] cluster scaffold protein (Boyd, 2008). Salmonella typhimurium Mrp(ApbC) has ATPase activity (Skovran, 2003; Boyd, 2009). E. coli Mrp is a member of the Mrp/NBP35 subfamily of the Mrp/MinD ATPase family in the SIMIBI class of the P-loop GTPases superclass of P-loop fold proteins; the Mrp/MinD/Etk superfamily combines the Mrp/MinD ATPase family with the Etk/Wzc family of tyrosine kinases (Leipe, 2002).	b2113
mrr	mcrF	methylated adenine and cytosine restriction protein	Enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	Restriction of DNA with certain methylated adenine or cytosine residues	9/98 Mrr peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed; 1/98 peptide masses indicate that occasionally the initial Met is not removed (Maillet, 2007). The N-terminus of overexpressed Mrr was determined, but the native RBS was not used and the initial Met was not clipped, probably due to Mrr protein overproduction (Waite-Rees, 1991). Mrr is normally cryptic, but is activated by high pressure stress, which leads to a recB-dependent SOS pathway activation.	b4351
msbA	None	lipid ABC transporter permease/ATPase	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Other	Lipid exporter, fused permease and ATPase components; exports LPS, phospholipids, and lipid A to the outer membrane outer leaflet; drug export and resistance; ABC family transporter; flippase; biogenesis of outer membrane; lipid-activated ATPase	MsbA PDB structures 1JSQ, 1PF4 and 1Z2R, and any conclusions derived from these structures, have been retracted due to a software data inversion error (Chang, 2006). A yhjD point mutation (R134C) allows the deletion of the otherwise essential msbA gene (Mamat, 2008). MsbA point mutations confering S18P or S50P suppress the lethal phenotype of a KDO null srlQ kdsD double mutant (Mamat, 2008).	b0914
lpxM	mlt, msbB, waaN	myristoyl-acyl carrier protein (ACP)-dependent acyltransferase	Putative factor; Adaptations, atypical conditions	Lipid A synthesis, KDO2-lauroyl-lipid IVA myristoyl-ACP acyltransferase	Null	b1855
mtlA	mtlC	mannitol-specific PTS enzyme: IIA, IIB and IIC components	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	Mannitol-specific Enzyme IIABC of PTS transport system	Null	b3599
mtlD	None	mannitol-1-phosphate dehydrogenase, NAD-dependent	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Mannitol-1-phosphate dehydrogenase, NAD-dependent	MtlD, UxaB, UxuB, YdfI and YeiQ are all COG0246/PF01232 members encoding mannitol/altrunate-related sugar oxidoreductases.	b3600
mtr	None	tryptophan transporter of high affinity	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	Tryptophan/indole:H+ symport permease, high affinity for Trp	TyrR regulon. HAAAP family. The AroP (general aromatic) and TnaB (Trp, low affinity) permeases can also transport tryptophan. Mtr is the only indole permease, as determined by genetic analysis of growth on indole byTrp auxotrophs (Yanofsky, 1991).	b3161
mukB	None	chromosome condensin MukBEF, ATPase and DNA-binding subunit	Structural component; Cell division	Chromosome condensin MukBEF, ATPase and DNA-binding subunit; SMC-related protein	Condensin is required for chromosome partitioning and compaction. Purified MukB and Topo II introduces right-handed knots into DNA. Coiled coil protein. Structural maintenance of chromosome (SMC) family.	b0924
murC	None	UDP-N-acetylmuramate:L-alanine ligase	Enzyme; Murein sacculus, peptidoglycan	UDP-N-acetylmuramate:L-alanine ligase; L-alanine adding enzyme	PDB: 1CC9 (model): Nosal, F., Legrand, R., Rowlands, D.A., Ferrari, P., Schoot, B., Van Heijenoort, J., unpublished	b0091
murD	None	UDP-N-acetylmuramoyl-L-alanine:D-glutamate ligase	Enzyme; Murein sacculus, peptidoglycan	D-glutamic acid adding enzyme; UDP-N-acetylmuramoyl-L-alanine:D-glutamate ligase	A carbamylated lysine residue is present in the active site. MurD also catalyses the synthesis of adenosine 5'-tetraphosphate.	b0088
murE	None	UDP-N-acetylmuramoyl-L-alanyl-D-glutamate:meso-diaminopimelate ligase	Enzyme; Murein sacculus, peptidoglycan	meso-diaminopimelate adding enzyme; UDP-N-acetylmuramoyl-L-alanyl-D-glutamate:meso-diaminopimelate ligase	A carbamylated lysine residue is present in the active site.	b0085
murF	mra	UDP-N-acetylmuramoyl-tripeptide:D-alanyl-D-alanine ligase	Enzyme; Murein sacculus, peptidoglycan	D-alanyl:D-alanine adding enzyme; UDP-N-acetylmuramoyl-tripeptide:D-alanyl-D-alanine ligase	Null	b0086
murG	None	N-acetylglucosaminyl transferase	Enzyme; Murein sacculus, peptidoglycan	N-acetylglucosaminyl transferase; UDP-N-acetylglucosamine:N-acetylmuramyl-(pentapeptide) pyrophosphoryl-undecaprenol N-acetylglucosamine transferase; murein synthesis peripheral membrane protein interacting with cardiolipin	Essential gene, Mengin-Lecreulx(1991).	b0090
mutH	mutR, prv	methyl-directed mismatch repair protein	Enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	Methyl-directed mismatch repair	Null	b2831
mutS	ant, fdv, plm	methyl-directed mismatch repair protein	Enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	Methyl-directed mismatch repair protein, weak ATPase; dimeric/tetrameric	The sdsR(ryeB) sRNA negatively regulates mutS mRNA stability, revealing a probably RpoS-dependent mechanism of ampicillin-induced mutagenesis (Gutierrez, 2013). MutS is a member of the P-loop NTPase clan and the ABC-ATPase superfamily, has weak ATPase activity, and is involved in recognition of a DNA mismatch. MutS C-terminus dimerization, not tetramerization, is required for mismatch repair (Mendillo, 2007).	b2733
mutT	nudA	dGTP-preferring nucleoside triphosphate pyrophosphohydrolase	Enzyme; 2'-Deoxyribonucleotide metabolism	8-oxo-dGTPase, antimutator; prevents AT-to-GC transversions; dGTP pyrophosphohydrolase	Over-expression of cloned mutT induces filamentation (Burke, 2013). Nudix hydrolase.	b0099
mutY	micA, mutB(S.t.)	adenine DNA glycosylase	Enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	Adenine DNA glycosylase, G-A mismatched DNA repair; 2-hydroxyadenine glycosylase	Null	b2961
emrE	eb, mvrC	DLP12 prophage; multidrug resistance protein	Transport; Drug/analog sensitivity; Phage or Prophage Related	Multidrug resistance pump, DLP12 prophage; methylviologen sensitivity	EmrE defunct PDB structures 1S7B and 2F2M, and any conclusions derived from these structures, have been retracted due to a software data inversion error (Chang, 2006; Ma, 2007). Correct structures are now available. EmrE belongs to the SMR efflux pump family, DMT superfamily. EmrE accomplishes multidrug efflux by coupling conformational changes between two heterodimers with proton gradient. Although the dual-topology membrane protein structure suggested by the original cryo EM studies has been controversial, the emerging consensus from different experimental approaches is that EmrE is an asymmetric dimer with the two monomers in antiparallel orientations in the membrane (Korkhov, 2009).	b0543
nadA	nicA	quinolinate synthase, subunit A	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Pyridine nucleotide	Quinolinate synthase, [4Fe-4S] cluster subunit, A protein	C291 and C294 form a reversible disulfide bond that regulates NadA activity (Saunders, 2008).	b0750
nadB	nic, nicB	quinolinate synthase, L-aspartate oxidase (B protein) subunit	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Pyridine nucleotide	L-aspartate oxidase, FAD-dependent; quinolinate synthase flavoprotein subunit, B protein; LASPO	NadB activity is required for nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) biosynthesis in both aerobic and anaerobic conditions (Messner, 2002). In anaerobic conditions, NadB uses fumarate as the electron acceptor, producing iminosuccinate and succinate; in aerobic conditions, NadB uses oxygen as the electron acceptor because the concentration of the preferred substrate fumarate is low, producing iminosuccinate and hydrogen peroxide (Tedeschi, 1996; Korshunov, 2010).	b2574
nagA	None	N-acetylglucosamine-6-phosphate deacetylase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Amino sugars	N-acetylglucosamine-6-phosphate deacetylase	Mg(2+) stimulon-PhoPQ regulon. 2/128 NagA peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is not removed (Maillet, 2007).	b0677
nagB	glmD	glucosamine-6-phosphate deaminase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Amino sugars	Glucosamine-6-phosphate deaminase; hexameric trimer of dimers	Null	b0678
umpH	nagD	UMP phosphatase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Amino sugars	UMP phosphatase; HAD23	UmpH(NagD) has UMP and GMP phosphatase activity in vitro, as well as weaker phosphatase activity on a variety of substrates (Kuznetsova, 2006; Tremblay, 2006). The UmpH(NagD) and UmpG(SurE) phosphatases degrade UMP to uridine in vivo (Reaves, 2013). HAD superfamily.	b0675
nagE	pstN, ptsN	N-acetyl glucosamine specific PTS enzyme IIC, IIB, and IIA components	Enzyme; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	 PTS system EIIABC(Nag) component; N-acetylglucosamine transport	Null	b0679
nagC	nagR	N-acetylglucosamine-inducible nag divergent operon transcriptional repressor	Regulator; Central intermediary metabolism: Amino sugars	N-acetylglucosamine-inducible nag divergent operon transcriptional repressor	Null	b0676
nanA	npl	N-acetylneuraminate lyase	Enzyme; Surface polysaccharides & antigens	N-Acetylneuraminate lyase (aldolase)	Null	b3225
narG	chlC, narC	nitrate reductase 1, alpha subunit	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Nitrate reductase I (NRA), alpha subunit	Induced by anaerobiosis plus nitrate. NarG forms interactions with Mo proteins (MogA, MoeA, MobA and MobB), in the presence of NarJ, following the completion of Moco biosynthesis. HT_Cmplx14_Mem: NarG+NarH. NarG is anchored to the cytoplasmic side of the inner membrane. NarJ is essential for a Tat-dependent interaction between NarG and Mo proteins.	b1224
narH	chlC	nitrate reductase 1, beta (Fe-S) subunit	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Nitrate reductase I (NRA), beta subunit	Induced by anaerobiosis plus nitrate. T_Cmplx14_Mem: NarG+NarH. HT_Cmplx31_Mem: NarH+NarZ.	b1225
narI	chlI	nitrate reductase 1, gamma (cytochrome b(NR)) subunit	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Nitrate reductase I (NRA), gamma subunit	NarI is involved in localizing NarGHI to the membrane. Induced by anaerobiosis plus nitrate.	b1227
narJ	None	molybdenum-cofactor-assembly chaperone delta subunit of nitrate reductase 1	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Redox enzyme maturation protein (REMP) for NarG; facilitates molybdenum insertion; binds NarG	NarJ has two NarG binding sites: one for Mo insertion and one to block membrane attachment via NarI until activation is complete. Induced by anaerobiosis plus nitrate. NarJ is essential for a Tat-dependent interaction between NarG and Mo proteins.	b1226
narK	None	nitrate/nitrite transporter	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Anions	Nitrate/nitrite antiporter; promotes nitrite extrusion and uptake	Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS).	b1223
narL	frdR	response regulator in two-component regulatory system with NarX	Regulator; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Two-component regulator protein for nitrate/nitrite response; cognate sensor is NarX	9/69 NarL peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed (Maillet, 2007).	b1221
narV	chlZ	nitrate reductase 2 (NRZ), gamma subunit	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Nitrate reductase II (NRZ), gamma-subunit	NarV is involved in localizing NarYZV to the membrane. Stationary phase induced, RpoS-dependent.	b1465
narW	chlZ	nitrate reductase 2 (NRZ), delta subunit (assembly subunit)	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Redox enzyme maturation protein (REMP) for for NarZYV, molybdenum insertion; binds NarZ	NarW has two NarZ binding sites: one for Mo insertion and one to block membrane attachment via NarV until activation is complete. NarJ and NarW are interchangeable. Stationary phase induced, RpoS-dependent.	b1466
narX	frdR, narR	sensory histidine kinase in two-component regulatory system with NarL	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Two-component nitrate/nitrite sensor-transmitter protein; NarL is cognate regulator; functional redundance with narQ	Null	b1222
narY	chlZ	nitrate reductase 2 (NRZ), beta subunit	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Nitrate reductase II (NRZ), beta subunit	Stationary phase induced, RpoS-dependent.	b1467
narZ	chlZ	nitrate reductase 2 (NRZ), alpha subunit	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Nitrate reductase II (NRZ), alpha subunit	Stationary phase induced, RpoS-dependent. HT_Cmplx31_Mem: NarH+NarZ. NarZ is anchored to the cytoplasmic side of the inner membrane.	b1468
ndh	None	respiratory NADH dehydrogenase 2/cupric reductase	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Aerobic respiration	Respiratory NADH dehydrogenase II; NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase II; membrane-bound flavoprotein; cupric reductase	Null	b1109
ndk	None	multifunctional nucleoside diphosphate kinase and apyrimidinic endonuclease and 3'-phosphodiesterase	Enzyme; Purine ribonucleotide biosynthesis	Nucleoside diphosphate kinase; NDP kinase	Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004). UDG and Ndk form a complex (Goswami, 2006).	b2518
nfo	None	endonuclease IV with intrinsic 3'-5' exonuclease activity	Enzyme; Degradation of DNA	AP endodeoxyribonuclease IV; member of soxRS regulon; endonuclease IV	Null	b2159
nhaA	ant, antA	sodium-proton antiporter	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Cations	Na+/H+ antiporter 1, strongly pH-dependent; helps regulate intracellular pH and extrude lithium; nhaA_P1 activated by NhaR, repressed by H-NS and stimulated by Na(+)	nhaA P2 promoter is RpoS-regulated, but H-NS, Na(+)- and NhaR-independent.	b0019
nirB	None	nitrite reductase, large subunit, NAD(P)H-binding	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Nitrite reductase [NAD(P)H] subunit	Null	b3365
nirC	None	nitrite transporter	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Nitrite uptake transporter; membrane protein	OtherPDB(S. typhimurium): 4FC4.	b3367
nirD	None	nitrite reductase (NADH) small subunit	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Nitrite reductase, small subunit, NADH-binding	Null	b3366
sfsB	nlp, sfs7	malPQ operon transcriptional activator	Regulator; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Transcriptional activator for malQ, malP and lacZ	The conserved core of SfsB is 65% identical (41/63 residues) to the DNA-binding transcriptional helix-turn-helix (HTH) Ner regulatory protein of phage Mu (Choi, 1989). otherPDB(Mu phage): 1NER; 1NEQ (Strzelecka, 1995). Although SfsB(Nlp) has not been experimentally demonstrated to bind to DNA, its high similarity to the DNA-binding Ner protein and the transcriptional activation function of SfsB(Nlp) indicate it is a DNA-binding protein.	b3188
nlpA	None	cytoplasmic membrane lipoprotein-28	Membrane; Macromolecule synthesis, modification: Lipoprotein	Lipoprotein-28, inner membrane protein, function unknown	Pathogenicity island eip (EAEC strain 042) has inserted in the adjacent yicS-nepI intergenic region. The first 23 aa of NlpA are a type II signal peptide. Mutants have reduced OM vesiculation (McBroom, 2006).	b3661
bamC	dapX, nlpB	BamABCDE complex OM biogenesis lipoprotein	Membrane; Macromolecule synthesis, modification: Lipoprotein	Tandem domain lipoprotein in BamABCDE OM biogenesis complex; mutant is rifampin-sensitive	The structure of BamB unexpectedly revealed the presence of two similar tandem domains (Albrecht, 2011). RpoE regulon. Overexpression causes abnormal biofilm architecture. The first 24 aa of BamC are a type II signal peptide.	b2477
nmpC'	phmA	DLP12 prophage; truncated outer membrane porin (pseudogene)	IS, phage, Tn; Phage or Prophage Related	Pseudogene reconstruction, OM porin, DLP12 prophage; interrupted by IS5B	IS5B inserted at codon 347, causing a four base pair target site duplication TTAG and a C-terminal fusion ORF that is not expressed. The original, pre-insertion C-terminus is reconstructed, with KALGVSTDDIVAVGLVYQF replacing the IS5-encoded C-terminus KEGANKSLI. A 160 bp nmpC 3'-UTR is predicted to contain a predicted rho-indpendent terminator. 3'-UTR may contain ipeX sRNA (Castillo-Keller, 2006). nmpC mRNA and the putative ipeX downstream sRNA are silent in K-12. Overproduced ipeX RNA posttranslationally inhibits ompC and ompF.	b0553
nrdA	dnaF	ribonucleoside-diphosphate reductase 1, alpha subunit	Enzyme; 2'-Deoxyribonucleotide metabolism	Ribonucleoside-diphosphate reductase 1, alpha subunit; class Ia aerobic ribonucleotide reductase; B1 protein, R1 subunit	The reducing equivalents for NrdA are provided by glutaredoxin or thioredoxin. NrdA binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004). About half of the overproduced NrdA protein has the first one or two amino acids removed. E. coli B native NrdA protein is reported to start with Gln. A second native E. coli B NrdA protein start may correspond to a cleavage after Leu26. Leu26 CTG codon is unlikely to be an alternative start codon in K-12 or B and no evidence of this cleavage or an alternative start codon was seen with the overproduced K-12 protein; an M-N or MN-Q cleavage by MAP would be unusual; the variable N-termini in B strains may be created by an unknown protease. The yfaL-nrdAByfaE divergent operon promoter region binds FNR and nrdAB-yfaE operon expression is repressed by FNR (Federowicz, 2014).	b2234
nrdB	ftsB	ribonucleoside-diphosphate reductase 1, beta subunit, ferritin-like protein	Enzyme; 2'-Deoxyribonucleotide metabolism	Ribonucleoside-diphosphate reductase 1, beta subunit; class Ia aerobic ribonucleotide reductase; B2 protein, R2 subunit	The reducing equivalents provided by glutaredoxin or thioredoxin. Tyr122 of NrdB is an essential tyrosal radical. The yfaL-nrdAByfaE divergent operon promoter region binds FNR and nrdAB-yfaE operon expression is repressed by FNR (Federowicz, 2014).	b2235
nth	None	DNA glycosylase and apyrimidinic (AP) lyase (endonuclease III)	Enzyme; Degradation of DNA	Endonuclease III: DNA N-glycosylase/AP lyase	E. coli Nth was originally discovered as an enzyme that cut UV-damaged DNA (Radman, 1976). E. coli Nth was re-discovered as a urea-DNA glycosylase (Breimer, 1980). Purified Nth has a DNA N-glycoslylase activity that creates apurinic or apyrimidinic (AP) sites at certain DNA lesions that are then cleaved by AP lyase, a second Nth activity (Gates, 1977; Demple, 1980; Katcher, 1983; Breimer, 1984; Bailly, 1987; Kow, 1987; Kim, 1988). The AP lyase activity of Nth cleaves DNA by a beta elimination rather than a hydrolase mechanism, leading to the suggestion that Nth not be considered as an endonuclease; this notion was subsequently disputed by another group, and later reasserted (Bailly, 1987; Kim, 1988; Bailly, 1989). Nth contains a 4Fe-4S cluster that requires either IscA or SufA for proper assembly (Tan, 2009).	b1633
nadE	efg, ntrL	NAD synthetase, NH3/glutamine-dependent	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Pyridine nucleotide	NAD synthase, ammonia dependent	NadE is regulated by cyaR sRNA (De Lay, 2009).	b1740
nupG	None	nucleoside transporter	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Nucleosides, purines, pyrimidines	Nucleoside transporter	NupG, XapB and YegT are paralogs. Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS). CytR regulon. DeoR regulon.	b2964
nusA	None	transcription termination/antitermination L factor	Factor; RNA synthesis, modification, DNA transcription	Transcription termination/antitermination L factor; mutant survives lambda induction	Null	b3169
nusB	groNB, ssaD, ssyB	transcription antitermination protein	Factor; RNA synthesis, modification, DNA transcription	Transcription termination/antitermination factor; mutant survives lambda induction	Null	b0416
nusG	None	transcription termination factor	Putative factor; RNA synthesis, modification, DNA transcription	Stabilizes phage lambda protein N-NusA-RNAP antitermination complex	Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004).	b3982
ogt	None	O-6-alkylguanine-DNA:cysteine-protein methyltransferase	Enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase, constitutive	Null	b1335
ompA	con, tolG, tut	outer membrane protein A (3a;II*;G;d)	Membrane; Outer membrane constituents	Outer membrane protein A; Outer membrane porin A; T-even phage receptor; weak porin; homodimer, abundant cell surface protein	OmpA is required for colicins K and L and the stabilization of mating aggregates. OmpA is elevated 5X during growth at 4C (enabled by Oleispira antarctica Cpn10/60 transgene). OmpA expression is elevated during biofilm formation (Orme, 2006). OmpA is required for biofilm formation under some condtions. Translation of OmpF is inhibited by the rseX sRNA. Alkali-inducible Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004). Perhaps because it is so abundant, OmpA is found in some inner membrane preparations.	b0957
ompC	butR, meoA, par	outer membrane porin protein C	Membrane; Outer membrane constituents	Outer membrane porin C	OmpF and OmpC facilitate the export of YebX (Prehna, 2012). Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004). Mutants have elevated OM vesiculation (McBroom, 2006). The divergent ompC-micF operon promoter region binds ArcA and ArcA activates micF and ompC expression (Federowicz, 2014).	b2215
ompF	cmlB, coa, cry, nfxB?, tolF	outer membrane porin 1a (Ia;b;F)	Membrane; Outer membrane constituents	Outer membrane porin F	OmpF and OmpC facilitate the export of YebX (Prehna, 2012). Trimeric. T2 receptor. Colicin N receptor and translocator. Translation of OmpF is inhibited by the rseX sRNA. Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004).	b0929
ompR	kmt, ompB	response regulator in two-component regulatory system with EnvZ	Regulator; Global regulatory functions	Response regulator for osmoregulation; regulates production of outer membrane proteins	The cognate sensor kinase for OmpR is EnvZ. Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004). Mutants have elevated OM vesiculation (McBroom, 2006). Mutations in ompR have increased motility in the presence of high [NaCl], which normally suppresses motility (Girgis, 2007). 	b3405
ompT	None	DLP12 prophage; outer membrane protease VII; outer membrane protein 3b	Enzyme; Outer membrane constituents; Phage or Prophage Related	Outer membrane protease VII, DLP12 prophage; OM protein a (3b); omptin	Mg(2+) stimulon-PhoPQ regulon, EvgAS-PhoPQ cascade enhanced-expression subset. envZ(cpr) mutants are defective in OmpT production.	b0565
oppA	None	oligopeptide ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein	Transport; Not classified	Oligopeptide ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein	OppA binds oligopeptides from two to five amino acids long and has a preference for basic peptides, especially lysine-containing peptides (Klepsch, 2011). Polyamine modulon (Igarashi, 2006). Spermidine binds to oppA mRNA and stimulates OppA protein synthesis initiation (Igarashi, 1997; Igarashi, 2000; Higashi, 2008). After four hours of Zn(II) stress, OppA protein levels decreased (Easton, 2006).	b1243
oppB	stkB	oligopeptide ABC transporter permease	Transport; Not classified	Oligopeptide ABC transporter permease	Null	b1244
oppC	stkB	oligopeptide ABC transporter permease	Transport; Not classified	Oligopeptide ABC transporter permease	Null	b1245
oppD	None	oligopeptide ABC transporter ATPase	Transport; Not classified	Oligopeptide ABC transporter ATPase	Null	b1246
oppF	None	oligopeptide ABC transporter ATPase	Putative transport; Not classified	Oligopeptide ABC transporter ATPase	Null	b1247
osmB	None	osmotically and stress inducible lipoprotein	Putative membrane; Osmotic adaptation	Osmotically and stress inducible lipoprotein; function unknown; mutation confers partial resistance to osmotic stress	The first 23 aa of osmB are a type II signal peptide.	b1283
osmC	None	lipoyl-dependent Cys-based peroxidase, hydroperoxide resistance; salt-shock inducible membrane protein; peroxiredoxin	Phenotype; Osmotic adaptation	Lipoyl-dependent Cys-based peroxidase, hydroperoxide resistance; stress-induced peroxiredoxin; salt-shock inducible membrane protein; required for long-term survival in stationary phase	OsmC metabolizes and protects against organic hydroperoxides (Lesniak, 2003). OsmC is directly reduced by lipoylated enzymes (Cussiol, 2010). OsmC contains a conserved CxxS redox motif. Regulated by NhaR, RcsBDC, Lrp, Hns and RpoS. Nonessential gene.	b1482
oxyR	momR, mor	oxidative and nitrosative stress transcriptional regulator	Regulator; Global regulatory functions	Oxidative and nitrosative stress transcriptional regulator	OxyR responds to hydrogen peroxide by forming a Cys109-Cys208 disulphide bond which activates OxyR to up-regulate transcription of the oxidative stress regulon and the oxyS sRNA; OxyS then regulates expression of additional genes (Tao, 1989; Storz, 1990; Christman, 1989; Altuvia, 1997; Zheng, 1998; Lee, 2004). Both oxidized and reduced OxyR negatively auto-represses its own transcription, hence OxyR is a dual mode transcriptional regulator (Christman, 1989; Tao, 1991). During anaerobic respiration OxyR is S-nitrosylated due to nitrosative stress, activating OxyR to up-regulate genes in a distinct regulon that protect against S-nitrosothiols (Hausladen, 1996; Seth, 2012). Glutathionylation of OxyR in response to redox signaling may activate a third distinct OxyR regulon (Kim, 2002). Transcription of the catalase inhibitor protein YchF mRNA is repressed by OxyR (Wenk, 2012).	b3961
pabA	None	aminodeoxychorismate synthase, subunit II	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Folic acid	Sulfonamide resistance; p-aminobenzoate biosynthesis	Null	b3360
pabB	None	aminodeoxychorismate synthase, subunit I	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Folic acid	Sulfonamide resistance; p-aminobenzoate biosynthesis	Null	b1812
pal	excC	peptidoglycan-associated outer membrane lipoprotein	Membrane; Macromolecule synthesis, modification: Lipoprotein	Lipoprotein associated with peptidoglycan; involved in maintaining cell membrane integrity	Cell envelope integrity is stabilized by the Tol-Pal system linking inner and outer membranes. The first 21 aa of Pal are a type II signal peptide. Pal restores the outer membrane integrity of an lpp mutant, but overproduced Lpp has no effect on a pal mutant phenotype. Mutants have elevated OM vesiculation (McBroom, 2006).	b0741
panF	None	pantothenate:sodium symporter	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Cations	Pantothenate permease	PanF is a symporter.	b3258
parC	None	DNA topoisomerase IV, subunit A	Enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	Topoisomerase IV, subunit A, ATP-dependent, type II; chromosome decatenase; relaxes both positive and negative supercoils; DNA unknotting activity; heterotetrameric	parC is an essential gene (Kato, 1990). The parC mutants in the Keio collection have been shown to harbor an intact copy of parC in addition to the deletion allele (Yamamoto, 2009). ParC physically interacts with SeqA; Topo IV is stimulated by SeqA (Kang, 2003).	b3019
parE	nfxD	DNA topoisomerase IV, subunit B	Enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	Topoisomerase IV, subunit B, ATP-dependent, type II; chromosome decatenase; relaxes positive supercoils much faster than negative supercoils; DNA unknotting activity; heterotetrameric	Topo IV is stimulated by SeqA.	b3030
pck	pckA	phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase [ATP]	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Gluconeogenesis	Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase [ATP]	The yhgE-pck divergent promoter region binds ArcA (Federowicz, 2014).	b3403
pcm	None	L-isoaspartate protein carboxylmethyltransferase type II	Enzyme; Proteins - translation and modification	Protein-L-isoaspartate O-methyltransferase, SAM-dependent; repair of isoaspartyl residues; mutant is suseptible to secondary stresses and has a competitive disadvantage in stationary phase; monomeric; overexpression confers tolerance to thermal str	Pcm may work with SurE: they are co-transcribed and have addictive effects on isoaspartyl accumulation during stationary phase. Pcm was originally thought to be required for stationary phase and heat-stress survival, but this was due to a secondary rpoS mutation. otherPDB (P. furiosus): 1JG1.	b2743
pcnB	None	poly(A) polymerase	Enzyme; RNA synthesis, modification, DNA transcription	Poly(A) polymerase; controls plasmid copy number; rare AUU start codon, growth-rate regulated; monomeric; degradosome component in stationary phase	AUU start proven by mutagenesis analysis. PcnB can polyadenylate many mRNAs and it is proposed that Rho-independent transcription terminators serve as polyadenylation signals (Mohanty, 2006). The first 10 amino acids of PcnB are processed off by an unknown protease (Cao, 1992). RssB(SprE) is required to maintain the association of PcnB with the degradosome during stationary phase (Carabetta, 2010).	b0143
pdxA	None	4-hydroxy-L-threonine phosphate dehydrogenase, NAD-dependent	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Pyridoxine	4-hydroxythreonine-4-phosphate dehydrogenase; fourth step in pyridoxal 5-phosphate biosynthesis; isoniazid resistance; requires divalent cations and NAD(P)+	Converts 4-hydroxy-L-threonine phosphate (HTP) to 3-amino-2-oxopropyl phosphate. pdxA is a multi-copy suppressor of a pdxB deletion (Kim, 2010).	b0052
pdxB	None	erythronate-4-phosphate dehydrogenase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Pyridoxine	2-hydroxyacid dehydrogenase involved in pyridoxine biosynthesis upstream of 4-phospho-hydroxy-threonine; isoniazid resistance	pdxA, aroB, thrB, nudL(yeaB), hisB, php, and yjbQ were identified as multi-copy suppressors of a pdxB deletion (Kim, 2010).	b2320
pdxJ	None	pyridoxine 5'-phosphate synthase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Pyridoxine	Pyridoxine 5'-phosphate (PNP) synthase; homo-octamer	Null	b2564
pepA	carP, xerB	multifunctional aminopeptidase A: a cyteinylglycinase, transcription regulator and site-specific recombination factor	Enzyme; Degradation of proteins, peptides, glyco	Multifunctional Aminopeptidase A; transcriptional regulator of carAB; DNA-binding role in site-specific recombination mediating ColE1 plasmid multimer resolution; homohexameric	PepA has a broad specificity for successive removal of many N-terminal amino acids, although leucine is preferred as the residue N-terminal to the cleavage site.	b4260
pepD	pepH	aminoacyl-histidine dipeptidase (peptidase D)	Enzyme; Degradation of proteins, peptides, glyco	Peptidase D, Xaa-His dipeptidase	CsgD regulon, repressed. HT_Cmplx19_Cyt: PepD+Pgm+Zwf. HT_Cmplx41_Mem: Gnd+PepD.	b0237
pepN	None	aminopeptidase N	Enzyme; Degradation of proteins, peptides, glyco	Aminopeptidase N	The pepN-pncB diverent operon promoter region binds ArcA and ArcA represses pepN expression (Federowicz, 2014).	b0932
pepP	None	proline aminopeptidase P II	Enzyme; Degradation of proteins, peptides, glyco	Proline aminopeptidase, homotetrameric; aminopeptidase P	Overexpression causes abnormal biofilm architecture. Mutants have reduced OM vesiculation (McBroom, 2006).	b2908
pepQ	None	proline dipeptidase	Enzyme; Degradation of proteins, peptides, glyco	Proline dipeptidase; prolidase; Xaa-Pro dipeptidase	3/1146 PepQ peptide masses from MS analysis are consistent with this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed, but the second residue is Asp which usually precludes cleavage by methionine aminopeptidase (Maillet, 2007).	b3847
pfkA	None	6-phosphofructokinase I	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Glycolysis	6-phosphofructokinase-1; allosteric: activated by MgNDPs, inhibited by PEP; homoterameric	Null	b3916
pfkB	None	6-phosphofructokinase II	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Glycolysis	6-phosphofructokinase-2; homotetrameric; allosteric: inhibited by MgATP	A promoter activation mutation increases expression and suppresses pfkA mutations.	b1723
pflB	pfl	formate C-acetyltransferase 1, anaerobic; pyruvate formate-lyase 1	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Formate C-acetyltransferase 1; pyruvate formate-lyase 1; induced anaerobically; radical activated by PflA; deactivated by AdhE	PflB lysines K63, K107, K117, K124, K195, K454, K467 and K654 can be modified to N6-succinyllysine (Zhang, 2011). PflB lysines K63, K117, K124, K195, K454, K541 and K591 can be modified to N6-acetyllysine (Zhang, 2009). HT_Cmplx8_Cyt: GcrA(YfiD)+PflB.	b0903
pgi	None	glucosephosphate isomerase	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Glycolysis	Glucose-6-phosphate isomerase	Pgi is also called phosphoglucose isomerase.	b4025
pgk	None	phosphoglycerate kinase	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Glycolysis	Phosphoglycerate kinase	HT_Cmplx50_Mem: Pgk+Usg.	b2926
pgpA	yajN	phosphatidylglycerophosphatase A	Enzyme; Macromolecule synthesis, modification: Phospholipids	Phosphatidylglycerophosphatase A, membrane bound	A pgpA pgpB mutant is viable and still makes phosphatidylglycerol; a pgpABC triple mutant is non-viable (Lu, 2011).	b0418
pgpB	None	phosphatidylglycerophosphatase B	Enzyme; Macromolecule synthesis, modification: Phospholipids	Phosphatidylglycerophosphatase B, membrane bound; minor undecaprenyl pyrophosphate phosphatase (UppP) activity	A pgpA pgpB mutant is viable and still makes phosphatidylglycerol; a pgpA pgpB pgpC triple mutant is non-viable (Lu, 2011). The pgpB gene is nonessential, but is synthetically lethal with a bacA ybjG double mutant; all three genes encode undecaprenyl pyrophosphate phosphatase (UppP) activity, which is essential; overexpression of pgpB confers bacitracin resistance. (El-Ghachi, 2005). ybjG, pgpB, and lpxT are paralogs. 	b1278
pgsA	None	phosphatidylglycerophosphate synthetase	Enzyme; Macromolecule synthesis, modification: Phospholipids	Phosphatidylglycerophosphate synthase	pgsA mutants are non-motile due to elevated RpoS levels that repress flhDC transcription; pgsA3 multicopy suppressers gadW, metE and nudL(yeaB) act by increasing RpoS levels (Uchiyama, 2010). PgsA overexpression causes filamentous biofilm formation.	b1912
pheA	None	chorismate mutase and prephenate dehydratase, P-protein	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Phenylalanine	Chorismate mutase and prephenate dehydratase, P-protein; phenylalanine synthesis; FPA resistance	PheA has an N-terminal chorismate mutase domain, a central prephenate dehydratase domain and a C-terminal Phe-binding regulatory domain.	b2599
pheP	None	phenylalanine transporter	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	Phenylalanine-specific permease	The pheP GTG start was verified by start codon mutagenesis (Pi, 1991). pheP is in the PurR regulon (Marbach, 2012).	b0576
pheS	phe-act	phenylalanine tRNA synthetase, alpha subunit	Enzyme; Aminoacyl tRNA synthetases, tRNA modification	Phenylalanine--tRNA ligase, alpha-subunit	HT_Cmplx7_Cyt: PheS+PheT. 5/522 PheS peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed (Maillet, 2007).	b1714
pheT	None	phenylalanine tRNA synthetase, beta subunit	Enzyme; Aminoacyl tRNA synthetases, tRNA modification	Phenylalanine--tRNA ligase, beta-subunit	HT_Cmplx7_Cyt: PheS+PheT.	b1713
yjdM	phnA	zinc-ribbon family protein	Null	Zinc-ribbon family protein, function unknown	phnA was originally thought to be part of the phn operon, but it has no phn phenotype (Metcalf, 1993). YjdM(PhnA) has an N-terminal Zn ribbon domain (PF08274) and a C-terminal domain of unknown function (PF03831).	b4108
yjdN	phnB	metalloprotein superfamily protein	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Metalloprotein superfamily protein, function unknown	phnB was originally thought to be part of the phn operon, but it has no phn phenotype (Metcalf, 1993). The Glo_EDI_BRP_like_8 superfamily profile (NCBI CDD cd07246) unites several metalloenzyme families including the bleomycin resistance protein, glyoxalase I, and ring-cleaving dioxygenase, although PhnB does not belong to any of theose families.	b4107
phnC	None	phosphonate ABC transporter ATPase	Transport; Central intermediary metabolism: Phosphorus compounds	Phosphonate ABC transporter ATPase; phosphonate catabolism	PhnCDE is a probable phosphonate ABC transporter; the phnE' pseudogene is defective in K-12; phosphonate utilization is cryptic in K-12. Pho regulon.	b4106
phnD	psiD	phosphonate ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Anions	Phosphonate ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein; phosphonate catabolism	PhnCDE is a probable phosphonate ABC transporter; the phnE' pseudogene is defective in K-12; phosphonate utilization is cryptic in K-12. PhnD binds 2-aminoethylphosphonate and other phosphonates. The first 26 aa of PhnD are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b4105
phnF	None	putative DNA-binding transcriptional regulator of phosphonate uptake and biodegradation	Putative regulator; Not classified	Phosphonate utilization, probable regulatory gene	GntR family. Pho regulon. Phosphonate utilization is cryptic in K-12.	b4102
phnG	None	ribophosphonate triphosphate synthase subunit	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Phosphorus compounds	Ribophosphonate triphosphate synthase subunit; phosphonate catabolism	Ribophosphonate triphosphate (RPnTP; alpha-D-ribose-1-methylphosphonate-5'-triphosphate) is formed from ATP and methylphosphonate [CH(4)PO(3)] in vitro by PhnIGHL, releasing adenine; PhnI itself is a nucleosidase, suggesting it is the catalytic subunit of the PhnIGHL complex; the specific roles of PhnGHL in the ribophosphonate triphosphate synthase reaction are unknown but they may be substrate-specificity factors (Kamat, 2011). PhnG is part of a phosphonate-utilization PhnGHIJK enzyme complex (Jochimsen, 2011). Phosphonate utilization is cryptic in K-12.	b4101
phnH	None	ribophosphonate triphosphate synthase subunit	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Phosphorus compounds	Ribophosphonate triphosphate synthase subunit; phosphonate catabolism	Ribophosphonate triphosphate (RPnTP; alpha-D-ribose-1-methylphosphonate-5'-triphosphate) is formed from ATP and methylphosphonate [CH(4)PO(3)] in vitro by PhnIGHL, releasing adenine; PhnI itself is a nucleosidase, suggesting it is the catalytic subunit of the PhnIGHL complex; the specific roles of PhnGHL in the ribophosphonate triphosphate synthase reaction are unknown but they may be substrate-specificity factors (Kamat, 2011). PhnH is part of a phosphonate-utilization PhnGHIJK enzyme complex (Jochimsen, 2011). Phosphonate utilization is cryptic in K-12.	b4100
phnI	None	ribophosphonate triphosphate synthase complex putative catalytic subunit	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Phosphorus compounds	Ribophosphonate triphosphate synthase complex, probable catalytic subunit; phosphonate catabolism	Ribophosphonate triphosphate (RPnTP; alpha-D-ribose-1-methylphosphonate-5'-triphosphate, also known as 5'-triphospho-alpha-d-ribosyl 1'-phosphonate) is formed from ATP and methylphosphonate [CH(4)PO(3)] in vitro by PhnIGHL, releasing adenine; PhnI itself is a nucleosidase, suggesting it is the catalytic subunit of the PhnIGHL complex (Kamat, 2011). PhnI is part of a phosphonate-utilization PhnGHIJK enzyme complex (Jochimsen, 2011). Phosphonate utilization is cryptic in K-12.	b4099
phnJ	None	carbon-phosphorus lyase, SAM-dependent	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Phosphorus compounds	Phosphoribosyl phosphonate carbon-phosphorus lyase; SAM-dependent; phosphonate catabolism	PhnJ is the SAM-dependent carbon-phosphorous lyase enzyme containing a [4Fe-4S] iron-sulfur cluster required for activity that cleaves the C-P bond in phosphoribosyl phosphonate (PRPn, alpha-D-ribose-1-methylphosphonate-5-phosphate) to form alpha-D-ribose-1,2-cyclic-phosphate-5-phosphate (PRcP), releasing methane, during phosphonate catabolism (Kamat, 2011). PhnJ is part of a phosphonate-utilization PhnGHIJK enzyme complex (Jochimsen, 2011). Phosphonate utilization is cryptic in K-12.	b4098
phnK	None	carbon-phosphorus lyase complex subunit, putative ATP transporter ATP-binding protein	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Phosphorus compounds	Putative phosphonate ABC transporter ATP-binding subunit; phosphonate catabolism	PhnK is not required for the ribophosphonate triphosphate synthase reaction (Kamat, 2011). PhnK is part of a phosphonate-utilization PhnGHIJK enzyme complex (Jochimsen, 2011). PhnK is related to ATP transporter ATP-binding subunits and may have a role in either phosphonate catbolism or transport. Phosphonate utilization is cryptic in K-12.	b4097
phnL	None	ribophosphonate triphosphate synthase subunit; putative ABC transporter-related ATPase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Phosphorus compounds	Ribophosphonate triphosphate synthase subunit; phosphonate catabolism	Ribophosphonate triphosphate (RPnTP; alpha-D-ribose-1-methylphosphonate-5'-triphosphate) is formed from ATP and methylphosphonate [CH(4)PO(3)] in vitro by PhnIGHL, releasing adenine; PhnI itself is a nucleosidase, suggesting it is the catalytic subunit of the PhnIGHL complex; the specific roles of PhnGHL in the ribophosphonate triphosphate synthase reaction are unknown but they may be substrate-specificity factors (Kamat, 2011). PhnL is related to ATP transporter ATP-binding subunits and may also have a role in phosphonate transport. Phosphonate utilization is cryptic in K-12.	b4096
phnM	None	ribophosphonate triphosphate hydrolase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Phosphorus compounds	Ribophosphonate triphosphate hydrolase	PhnM cleaves pyrophosphate from ribophosphonate triphosphate (RPnTP; alpha-D-ribose-1-methylphosphonate-5'-triphosphate), an intermediate in methylphosphonate catabolism, to form phosphoribosyl phosphonate (PRPn, alpha-D-ribose-1-methylphosphonate-5-phosphate) (Kamat, 2011). Phosphonate utilization is cryptic in K-12.	b4095
phnN	None	ribose 1,5-bisphosphokinase	Transport; Central intermediary metabolism: Phosphorus compounds	Carbon-phosphorus lyase complex, ribose 1,5-bisphosphokinase subunit; also functions in an alternative pathway for PRPP formation	Phosphonate utilization is cryptic in K-12. ATP is the phosphoryl donor.	b4094
phnO	None	aminoalkylphosphonate N-acetyltransferase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Phosphorus compounds	Aminoalkylphosphonate N-acetyltransferase	PhnO is an aminoalkylphosphonate N-acetyltransferase whose physiological roles include detoxification of the D-alanine analog (S)-1-aminoethylphosphonate, as well as (S)-1-aminoethylphosphonate and aminomethylphosphonate catabolism (Hove-Jensen, 2012). The PhnO enzymatic activity was initially characterized in Salmonella typhimurium and is activated by a divalent cation (Errey, 2006). The Salmonella typhimurium N-terminal methionine is cleaved as determined by whole protein mass spectrometry (observed MW of 16,499 daltons) (Errey, 2006). Phosphonate utilization is cryptic in K-12. PhnO is a member of the GNAT acetyltransferase family.	b4093
phnP	None	5-phospho-alpha-D-ribosyl 1,2-cyclic phosphate phosphodiesterase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Phosphorus compounds	5-phospho-alpha-D-ribosyl 1,2-cyclic phosphate phosphodiesterase; phosphonate catabolism	PhnP is a 5-phospho-alpha-D-ribosyl 1,2-cyclic phosphate phosphodiesterase, cleaving an intermediate in phosphonate catabolism (Hove-Jensen, 2011). PhnP displays 2',3'-cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase and bis(p-nitrophenyl)phosphate phosphodiesterase activities in vitro (Podzelinska, 2009). Phosphonate utilization is cryptic in K-12.	b4092
phoA	psiA	bacterial alkaline phosphatase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Phosphorus compounds	Alkaline phosphatase, periplasmic; binds Zn(II); dimeric	Arg22 is removed from the mature enzyme by Iap to form isozyme 3. Isozyme 2 is a heterodimer of isozymes 1 and 3 subunits. PhoA requires the reducing environment of the periplasm and DsbA for activity; cysteine bonds C190-C200 and C308-C358 are needed. PhoA fusions are used to indicate periplasmic location of hybrid proteins.	b0383
phoB	phoRc	response regulator in two-component regulatory system with PhoR	Regulator; Global regulatory functions	Positive response regulator for pho regulon, two-component system	Null	b0399
phoE	ompE	outer membrane phosphoporin protein E	Membrane; Outer membrane constituents	Outer membrane phosphoporin protein E; trimeric	Null	b0241
creC	phoM	sensory histidine kinase in two-component regulatory system with CreB or PhoB	Enzyme; Global regulatory functions	Sensor kinase for CreBC regulon; induced by growth in minimal medium	CreC(PhoM) can also phosphorylate PhoB (Amemura, 1990).	b4399
phoP	None	response regulator in two-component regulatory system with PhoQ	Regulator; Global regulatory functions	Response regulator, two-component system; cognate to phoQ; response to extracellular divalent cations, pH, and acetate; DNA-binding protein	PhoPQ has been primarily characterized in Salmonella, with significant differences from E. coli. Mg(2+) stimulon-PhoPQ regulon, EvgAS-PhoPQ cascade enhanced-expression subset.	b1130
phoQ	None	sensory histidine kinase in two-component regulatory system with PhoP	Enzyme; Global regulatory functions	Histidine protein kinase sensor protein, two-component system; cognate to phoP; response to extracellular divalent cations, pH, and acetate	PhoPQ has been primarily characterized in Salmonella, with significant differences from E. coli. Mg(2+) stimulon-PhoPQ regulon, EvgAS-PhoPQ cascade enhanced-expression subset.	b1129
phoR	nmpB, phoR1, R1pho	sensory histidine kinase in two-component regulatory system with PhoB	Enzyme; Global regulatory functions	Sensor histidine kinase/phosphatase for pho regulon; cognate to phoB	Null	b0400
pstS	nmpA, phoR2a, phoS, R2pho	phosphate ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Anions	Phosphate ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein	Null	b3728
phoU	phoT	negative regulator of PhoR/PhoB two-component regulator	Regulator; Global regulatory functions	Negative regulator of pho regulon; may have additional role in phosphate metabolism	Null	b3724
phr	phrB	deoxyribodipyrimidine photolyase, FAD-binding	Enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	Deoxyribodipyrimidine photolyase; DNA photolyase; monomeric	The flavoprotein DNA photolyase uses light to repair cyclobutylpyrimidine dimers in DNA. The lesion is flipped out of the DNA double helix. Phr contains FADH2 and 5,10-MTHF chromophores.	b0708
pinE	pin	e14 prophage; site-specific DNA recombinase	Membrane; Phage or Prophage Related	DNA-invertase, site-specific recombination, e14 prophage	Null	b1158
pldA	None	outer membrane phospholipase A	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Phosphorus compounds	Outer-membrane phospholipase A; phospholipase A1; OmpLA	Null	b3821
pldB	None	lysophospholipase L2	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Phosphorus compounds	Lysophospholipase L2	Null	b3825
plsB	None	glycerol-3-phosphate O-acyltransferase	Enzyme; Macromolecule synthesis, modification: Phospholipids	Glycerol-3-phosphate acyltransferase	HT_Cmplx46_Mem: MdoH+PlsB.	b4041
pmbA	mcb, tldE	putative antibiotic peptide MccB17 maturation peptidase	Null	Probable peptidase required for the maturation and secretion of the antibiotic peptide MccB17; involved in CcdA antidote degradation; tolerance for effects on DNA gyrase by sex factor F gene letD	Null	b4235
pncB	None	nicotinate phosphoribosyltransferase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Pyridine nucleotide	Nicotinate phosphoribosyltransferase	pncB is probably in the PurR regulon (weak support) (Marbach, 2012). The pepN-pncB diverent operon promoter region binds ArcA (Federowicz, 2014).	b0931
pnp	bfl, pnpA	polynucleotide phosphorylase/polyadenylase	Enzyme; RNA synthesis, modification, DNA transcription	Polynucleotide phosphorylase; exoribonuclease; PNPase component of RNA degradosome; cold shock protein required for growth at low temperatures	Four ribonucleases, Rnc, Rnr, Pnp and Rph, redundantly process the 3' 33 nucleotides of 16S rRNA (Sulthana, 2013). PNPase activity is modulated by citrate binding (Nurmohamed, 2011). PNPase activity is modulated by c-di-GMP and PNPase is in a degradosome complexed with DosCP (Tuckerman, 2011). Cold induction occurs by reversal of post-translational autoregulation. The pnp mRNA leader is cleaved by RNase III, allowing PNPase to repress its own translation. Mutation of Gly454 impairs autogenous regulation without affecting catalytic activity. Mutants have elevated OM vesiculation (McBroom, 2006). Pnp can add long polynucleotide tails to mRNAs terminated by Rho factor (Mohanty, 2006). The overexpression of the Pnp S1 domain suppresses the cold growth defect of quadruple cspABEG mutant strain BX04 (Xia, 2001). 3/836 peptide masses from MS analysis indicate that an upstream start codon is utilized, but this contradicts N-terminal sequencing data and the upstream sequences are not conserved (Maillet, 2007). In Salmonella, a pnp mutant shows decreased expresssion of csgD, csgA and increased expression of yjcC; an nlpI mutant shows the opposite response as a pnp mutant (Rouf, 2011).	b3164
pntA	None	pyridine nucleotide transhydrogenase, alpha subunit	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	Proton-translocating NAD(P) transhydrogenase, alpha subunit; membrane protein	PntAB couples the inward translocation of protons across the cytoplasmic membrane to the reduction of NADP+ by NADH	b1603
pntB	None	pyridine nucleotide transhydrogenase, beta subunit	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	Proton-translocating NAD(P) transhydrogenase, beta subunit; membrane protein	PntAB couples the inward translocation of protons across the cytoplasmic membrane to the reduction of NADP+ by NADH	b1602
polA	resA	5' to 3' DNA polymerase and 3' to 5'/5' to 3' exonuclease	Enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	DNA polymerase I; required for plasmid replication; translesion synthesis; synthetic lethal with ygdG	polA is an essential gene (Joyce, 1984). The polA mutants in the Keio collection have been shown to harbor an intact copy of polA in addition to the deletion allele (Yamamoto, 2009). Residues 324-928 of PolA constitute the Klenow fragment.	b3863
polB	dinA	DNA polymerase II	Enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	DNA polymerase II, capable of translesion synthesis; role in the resumption of DNA synthesis after UV irradiation	Null	b0060
mrcA	ponA	penicillin-binding protein 1a, murein transglycosylase and transpeptidase	Enzyme; Murein sacculus, peptidoglycan	Murein polymerase, PBP1A; bifunctional murein transglycosylase and transpeptidase; penicillin-binding protein 1A; dimeric	LpoA binds to and stimulates PBP1A (MrcA) to synthesize more peptidoglycan (murein) (Paradis-Bleau, 2010; Typas, 2010; Young, 2010). The N-terminal transglycosylase activity polymerizes the glycan backbone and is penicillin-insensitive. The C-terminal transpeptidase activity crosslinks the muramic peptides and is penicillin-sensitive. Several phenotypes were associated with an mrcA deletion strain that inadvertantly deleted two neighboring genes, nudE(yrfE) and yrfF. One or both of these other genes turned out to be responsible for the observed mrcA-associated phenotypes. Murein polymerase is an essential function satisfied by either MrcA or MrcB. MrcA contains a PDZ domain involved in substrate recognition. MrcA is a membrane-bound periplasmic enzyme that has an uncleaved signal anchor.	b3396
potA	None	spermidine/putrescine ABC transporter ATPase	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	Spermidine/putrescine ABC transporter ATPase	PotBCAD spermidine/putrescine ABC transport system.	b1126
potB	None	spermidine/putrescine ABC transporter permease	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	Spermidine/putrescine ABC transporter permease	PotBCAD spermidine/putrescine ABC transport system.	b1125
potC	None	spermidine/putrescine ABC transporter permease	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	Spermidine/putrescine ABC transporter permease	PotBCAD spermidine/putrescine ABC transport system.	b1124
potD	None	spermidine/putrescine ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	Spermidine/putrescine ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein	PotBCAD spermidine/putrescine ABC transport system.	b1123
potE	None	putrescine/proton symporter: putrescine/ornithine antiporter	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	Putrescine-lyase antiporter	Lack of cadBA opereon induction results in an increase in speF-potE operon expression.	b0692
poxB	None	pyruvate dehydrogenase, thiamine triphosphate-binding, FAD-binding	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Pyruvate oxidase	Null	b0871
ppa	None	inorganic pyrophosphatase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	Inorganic pyrophosphatase; binds Zn(II); homohexameric, dimer of trimers	Null	b4226
ppc	asp, glu	phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Fermentation	Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase; monomeric	Mutant has reduced growth rate with little acetate excretion, decreased glucose consumption and a decreased carbon dioxide evolution rate.	b3956
ppiA	rot, rotA	peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase A (rotamase A)	Enzyme; Proteins - translation and modification	Peptidylprolyl-cis-trans-isomerase A, rotamase; periplasmic	Overexpression of cloned ppiA induces filamentation (Burke, 2013). 	b3363
ppiB	None	peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase B (rotamase B)	Enzyme; Proteins - translation and modification	Periplasmic peptidylprolyl-cis-trans-isomerase B, rotamase	An fkpA, surA, ppiB, ppiD quadruple mutant is viable (Justice, 2005). PpiB is down 6X during growth at 4C (enabled by Oleispira antarctica Cpn10/60 transgene).	b0525
ppsA	pps	phosphoenolpyruvate synthase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Gluconeogenesis	Phosphoenolpyruvate synthase; PEP synthase	PEP synthase is inactivated by an ADP-dependent (additional) phosphorylation of the phosphorylated active site His421 residue, a reaction mediated by PSRP(YdiA); PEP synthase is activated by a Pi-dependent pyrophosphorylase reaction also mediated by PSRP(YdiA) (Burnell, 2010).	b1702
prc	tsp	carboxy-terminal protease for penicillin-binding protein 3	Enzyme; Degradation of proteins, peptides, glyco	Periplasmic carboxy-terminal protease with specificity for non-polar C-termini	Penicillin-binding protein PBP3 is a typical Prc substrate. Prc contains a PDZ domain involved in substrate recognition. Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004).	b1830
prfA	sueB, uar, ups?	peptide chain release factor RF-1	Factor; Proteins - translation and modification	Peptide chain release factor 1, RF-1; translation termination factor recognizes UAG and UAA.	Although prfA is essential in K-12 strains, prfA can be deleted in E. coli strains with wildtype prfB function, either non-K-12 strains or K-12 strains with the repair of the presumably laboratory-acquired A246T point mutation in prfB (Johnson, 2011; Johnson, 2012; Ohtake, 2012). The K-12 prfB A246T mutation lowers the release activity of RF2 for UAA by five-fold (Uno, 1996; Dincbas-Renqvist, 2000). prfA can be deleted in MG1655 when 321 UAG stop codons are reassigned to UAA stop codons (Lajoie, 2013).	b1211
prfB	supK	peptide chain release factor RF-2	Factor; Proteins - translation and modification	Peptide chain release factor 2, RF-2; translation termination factor recognizes UGA and UAA; slightly defective allele	Although prfA is essential in K-12 strains, prfA can be deleted in E. coli strains with wildtype prfB function, either non-K-12 strains or K-12 strains with the repair of the presumably laboratory-acquired A246T point mutation in prfB (Johnson, 2011; Johnson, 2012; Ohtake, 2012). The K-12 prfB A246T mutation lowers the release activity of RF2 for UAA by five-fold (Uno, 1996; Dincbas-Renqvist, 2000). prfA can be deleted in MG1655 when 321 UAG stop codons are reassigned to UAA stop codons (Lajoie, 2013). The ribosome changes reading frame after codon 25 of the frameshifted prfB gene, an example of programmed frameshifting. The very poor growth of rluD deletion mutants in E. coli K-12 can be suppressed by a point mutation in prfB and a role in translation termination for the 23S rRNA helix 69 pseudouridines has been demonstrated (Ejby, 2007). The very poor growth of rluD deletions in all E. coli K-12 strains is due to their having a defective prfB gene with Thr246 instead of the Ala246 or Ser246 found in all other E. coli and Salmonella strains; rluD deletions have little effect on growth or stop codon recognition in a prfB Ala246 background (Uno, 1996; Dinçbas-Renqvist, 2000; Heurgué-Hamard, 2002; Dreyfus, 2011; O'Connor, 2011; Schaub, 2011). The very poor growth of rluD mutants in E. coli K-12 is due to increased translational readthrough and can be suppressed by point mutations in prfB or prfC (O'Connor, 2011). The very poor growth of rluD prfB mutants in E. coli K-12 is largely due to rpsG translation readthrough (and polar effects) and can be suppressed by restoring the rpsG stop codon, which is mutated to a Leu codon in K-12, leading to a 23 aa extension of ribosomal protein S7 (Dreyfus, 2011; Schaub, 2011). prfB is essential (Kawakami, 1988). The prfB mutants in the Keio collection have been shown to harbor an intact copy of prfB in addition to the deletion allele (Yamamoto, 2009).	b2891
priA	srgA	Primosome factor n' (replication factor Y)	Factor; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	Primosome factor Y, also called protein n'; ATP-dependent DNA helicase activity required for recA-dependent stable DNA replication mode; also involved in double-strand break repair	Null	b3935
priB	None	primosomal protein N	Factor; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	Primosomal protein n; ssDNA-binding protein	priB is a non-essential gene, but a priB priC double mutant grows poorly, indicating redundant functionality; an unusually careful approach was successfully utilized to construct the priB302 deletion without disturbing the downstream rpsR-rplI genes (Yamamoto, 2009). PriB is structurally similar to Ssb.	b4201
priC	None	primosomal replication protein N''	Factor; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	Primosomal protein n	priC is a non-essential gene, but a priB priC double mutant grows poorly, indicating redundant functionality (Sandler, 1999).	b0467
secY	prlA	preprotein translocase membrane subunit	Putative transport; Not classified	SecYEG inner membrane translocon core subunit; preprotein translocase secAYEG subunit; core translocon secYE subunit	SecYEG complex interacts with SecDFyajC to form a hexameric holocomplex. The N-terminus of SecY is blocked. Overexpression of SecY causes a decrease in the amount of biofilm formed and decreases motility.	b3300
proA	pro(1)	gamma-glutamylphosphate reductase	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Proline	Gamma-glutamyl phosphate reductase, proline biosynthesis	Null	b0243
proB	pro(2)	gamma-glutamate kinase	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Proline	Glutamate 5-kinase, proline biosynthesis; dimeric; feedback inhibition by proline	Contains PUA domain, required for proline-triggered aggregation.	b0242
proC	pro(3), Pro2	pyrroline-5-carboxylate reductase, NAD(P)-binding	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Proline	Pyrroline-5-carboxylate reductase, proline biosynthesis	Null	b0386
proS	drpA	prolyl-tRNA synthetase	Enzyme; Aminoacyl tRNA synthetases, tRNA modification	Proline--tRNA ligase	An insertion domain (248-393) in ProS is homologous to YeaK and YbaK.	b0194
proV	osrA, proU	glycine betaine/proline ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	Glycine betaine/proline ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein	Null	b2677
proW	osrA, proU	glycine betaine/proline ABC transporter permease	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	Glycine betaine/proline ABC transporter permease	Null	b2678
proX	osrA, proU	glycine betaine/proline ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein; cold shock protein	Transport; Osmotic adaptation	Glycine betaine/proline ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein; cold shock protein	The cold-inducibility of proX is dependent on the presence of the pnp gene.	b2679
prs	dnaR, prsA	phosphoribosylpyrophosphate synthase	Enzyme; Purine ribonucleotide biosynthesis	Phosphoribosylpyrophosphate synthase	HT_Cmplx20_Cyt: Prs+RbsK.	b1207
psd	None	phosphatidylserine decarboxylase	Enzyme; Macromolecule synthesis, modification: Phospholipids	Phosphatidylserine decarboxylase, phospholipid biosynthesis	Native Psd is cleaved: residues 1-253 comprise the beta chain; the C-terminal 69 aa is the alpha chain. The N-terminal residue of the alpha subunit (Ser254) is modified to pyruvic acid, a point mutation here results in reduced proteolytic processing.	b4160
pspA	cog	regulatory protein for phage-shock-protein operon	Factor; Phage-related functions and prophages	Phage shock protein A, negative regulator of psp operon; stress-inducible; binds PspB and PspC; enhances protein export through Tat pathway	A pspA deletion grows slow below 8C (as enabled by transgenic Oleispira antarctica Cpn10/60). Co-expression of pspA with pspC mitigates the growth inhibition by pspC; pspA-pspC has been suggested to be a possible toxin-antitoxin pair (Brown, 2003).	b1304
pspB	None	psp operon transcription co-activator	IS, phage, Tn; Phage-related functions and prophages	Positive regulator, with PspC, activates expression of psp operon; binds PspA; membrane protein	Null	b1305
pspC	None	psp operon transcription co-activator	Factor; Phage-related functions and prophages	Positive regulatory gene, cooperatively with PspB; facilitates binding of PspA to PspB; membrane protein; dimer	Overexpression of PspC causes abnormal biofilm architecture. Overexpression of PspC is reported to inhibit growth (Brown, 2003).	b1306
pspD	None	peripheral inner membrane phage-shock protein	IS, phage, Tn; Phage-related functions and prophages	Expressed protein in psp operon; peripheral inner membrane protein	Null	b1307
pspE	None	thiosulfate:cyanide sulfurtransferase (rhodanese)	IS, phage, Tn; Phage-related functions and prophages	Rhodanese, thiosulfate:cyanide sulfurtransferase; expressed in response to stress as part of psp operon, but also transcribed independently	Null	b1308
pssA	pss	phosphatidylserine synthase; CDP-diacylglycerol-serine O-phosphatidyltransferase	Enzyme; Macromolecule synthesis, modification: Phospholipids	Phosphatidylserine synthase	Null	b2585
pstA	phoR2b, phoT, R2pho	phosphate ABC transporter permease	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Anions	Phosphate ABC transporter permease	Topology mapped using protein fusions.	b3726
pstB	phoT	phosphate ABC transporter ATPase	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Anions	Phosphate ABC transporter ATPase	Null	b3725
pstC	phoW	phosphate ABC transporter permease	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Anions	Phosphate ABC transporter permease	Null	b3727
pth	asuA?, rap	peptidyl-tRNA hydrolase	Enzyme; Aminoacyl tRNA synthetases, tRNA modification	Peptidyl-tRNA hydrolase; required for phage lambda growth	Histidine 20 acts as the catalytic base during hydrolysis.	b1204
ptrA	ptr	protease III	Enzyme; Degradation of proteins, peptides, glyco	Protease III, periplasmic; zinc metalloprotease, protease Pi, pitrilysin; perhaps some specificity for 10 to 30 residue peptides	PqqL, PtrA and YhjJ belong to the M16 zinc metalloendopeptidase family. PtrA has two M16 protease two-domain modules, the first module has an N-terminal M16 domain (PF000675), including the HXXEH consensus active site, and a structurally homologous C-terminal M-16 inactive domain (PF05193); the second module has a highly degenerate N-terminal M16-like domain that has lost the HXXEH consensus active site and has a C-terminal M-16 inactive domain (PF05193) (K.E.R.).	b2821
ptsG	car, cat, CR, glcA, tgl, umg, umgC	fused glucose-specific PTS enzymes: IIB component/IIC component	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	Glucose phophotransferase Enzyme IIBC(Glc); glucose permease; dimeric	Null	b1101
ptsH	ctr, hpr, iex?	phosphohistidinoprotein-hexose phosphotransferase component of PTS system (Hpr)	Enzyme; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	PTS system histidine phosphocarrier protein HPr; phosphohistidinoprotein-hexose phosphotransferase	PtsI is autophosphorylated at His189 with the phosphate from PEP, producing pyruvate; the N-terminus of PtsI binds PtsH(HPr) and transfers the His189 phosphate group to His15 of the phosphorelay protein PtsH(HPr). PtsH(HPr) then phosphorylates and activates a variety of sugar-specific PTS system permease Enzyme IIB domains.	b2415
ptsI	ctr	PEP-protein phosphotransferase of PTS system (enzyme I)	Enzyme; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	Phosphoenolpyruvate-protein phosphotransferase; phosphotransferase system, enzyme I; E1; PEP-dependent autokinase	Dimeric enzyme I (PtsI) is autophosphorylated at His189 with the phosphate from PEP, producing pyruvate; the N-terminus of PtsI binds PtsH(HPr) and transfers the His189 phosphate group to His15 of PtsH(HPr). The C-terminal TIM barrel domain of PtsI is the dimerization domain.	b2416
purA	None	adenylosuccinate synthetase	Enzyme; Purine ribonucleotide biosynthesis	Adenylosuccinate synthase, purine synthesis	The purA promoter region binds FNR and purA expression is activated by FNR (Federowicz, 2014).	b4177
purC	ade(g)	phosphoribosylaminoimidazole-succinocarboxamide synthetase	Enzyme; Purine ribonucleotide biosynthesis	Phosphoribosyl-aminoimidazole-succinocarboxamide synthase; SAICAR synthase; purine synthesis	SAICAR synthase converts 4-carboxy-5-aminoimidazole ribonucleotide (CAIR) to 4-(N-succinylcarboxamide)-5-aminoimidazole ribonucleotide (SAICAR). PurC is elevated 3X during growth at 4C (enabled by Oleispira antarctica Cpn10/60 transgene).	b2476
purD	adth(a)	phosphoribosylglycinamide synthetase phosphoribosylamine-glycine ligase	Enzyme; Purine ribonucleotide biosynthesis	Phosphoribosylamine-glycine ligase, purine synthesis; phosphoribosylglycinamide synthase; glycinamide ribonucleotide synthase (GARS)	Null	b4005
purE	ade(f), ade3, Pur2	N5-carboxyaminoimidazole ribonucleotide mutase	Enzyme; Purine ribonucleotide biosynthesis	N5-carboxyaminoimidazole ribonucleotide (N-CAIR) mutase; purine synthesis	PurE was previously thought to be the catalytic subunit of phosphoribosylaminoimidazole carboxylase, with ATPase subunit PurK (Tiedeman, 1989). PurE is a separate N-CAIR mutase (Mueller, 1994; Meyer, 1999).	b0523
purF	ade(ub), purC	amidophosphoribosyltransferase	Enzyme; Purine ribonucleotide biosynthesis	Amidophosphoribosyltransferase, purine synthesis; also known as glutamine 5'-phosphoribosylpyrophosphate amidotransferase, GPATase	Cys2 is an N-terminal nucleophile for PurF.	b2312
purH	None	IMP cyclohydrolase and phosphoribosylaminoimidazolecarboxamide formyltransferase	Enzyme; Purine ribonucleotide biosynthesis	Phosphoribosylaminoimidazolecarboxamide formyltransferase; purine synthesis	Null	b4006
purK	purE2	N5-carboxyaminoimidazole ribonucleotide synthase	Enzyme; Purine ribonucleotide biosynthesis	N5-carboxyaminoimidazole ribonucleotide (N-CAIR) synthase; purine synthesis	PurK was previously thought to be the ATPase subunit of phosphoribosylaminoimidazole carboxylase, with catalytic subunit PurE (Tiedeman, 1989). PurK is a separate N-CAIR synthase (Mueller, 1994).	b0522
purL	purG(S.t.), purI	phosphoribosylformyl-glycineamide synthetase	Enzyme; Purine ribonucleotide biosynthesis	Phosphoribosylformylglycinamide synthase; contains a synthase domain (N) and a glutamine amidotransferase domain (C)	Null	b2557
purM	purG, purI(S.t.)	phosphoribosylaminoimidazole synthetase	Enzyme; Purine ribonucleotide biosynthesis	Phosphoribosyl-aminoimidazole (AIR) synthase; homodimeric	Null	b2499
purN	ade(c)	phosphoribosylglycinamide formyltransferase 1	Enzyme; Purine ribonucleotide biosynthesis	Glycinamide ribonucleotide transformylase (GART) 1, purine synthesis; glycinamide ribonucleotide formyltransferase	Null	b2500
purR	None	transcriptional repressor, hypoxanthine-binding	Regulator; Purine ribonucleotide biosynthesis	Purine regulon repressor	The purine regulon includes purBCDEFHKLMN, purR and guaBA.	b1658
putA	poaA, putC	fused DNA-binding transcriptional regulator/proline dehydrogenase/pyrroline-5-carboxylate dehydrogenase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Amino acids	Proline dehydrogenase and repressor for the putAP divergon	PutA is a multifunctional membrane-associated flavoprotein involved in proline catabolism: the central proline dehydrogenese domain feeds its product to the C-terminal Delta(1)-pyrroline-5-carboxylate dehydrogenese domain, to produce glutamate. The N-terminal 90 residue domain is the DNA-binding repressor domain. A divergon is a regulon comprised of two adjacent divergent operons or genes. Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004).	b1014
putP	putC	proline:sodium symporter	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Cations	Proline/Na+, Li+ symport protein; also transports propionate (Reed, 2006)	Null	b1015
pykA	None	pyruvate kinase II	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Glycolysis	Pyruvate kinase II, minor	PykA contributes significantly less than PykF to in vivo pyruvate kinase activity (Ponce, 1995; Al Zaid Siddiquee, 2004). PykA binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004). The pykA promoter region binds FNR and pykA expression is activated by FNR (Federowicz, 2014).	b1854
pykF	None	pyruvate kinase I	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Glycolysis	Pyruvate kinase I, fructose 1,6-bisphosphate-activated	Null	b1676
pyrB	None	aspartate carbamoyltransferase, catalytic subunit	Enzyme; Pyrimidine ribonucleotide biosynthesis	Aspartate carbamoyltransferase, catalytic subunit; ATCase; aspartate transcarbamylase; aspartate transcarbamoylase	HT_Cmplx5_Cyt: PyrB+PyrI.	b4245
pyrC	None	dihydro-orotase	Enzyme; Pyrimidine ribonucleotide biosynthesis	Dihydroorotase, the third step in pyrimidine biosynthesis; dimeric; Zn(II) metalloenzyme, binuclear metal center	Null	b1062
pyrD	None	dihydro-orotate oxidase, FMN-linked	Enzyme; Pyrimidine ribonucleotide biosynthesis	Dihydroorotate dehydrogenase, UMP biosynthesis	Null	b0945
pyrE	None	orotate phosphoribosyltransferase	Enzyme; Pyrimidine ribonucleotide biosynthesis	Orotate phosphoribosyltransferase	Null	b3642
pyrF	None	orotidine-5'-phosphate decarboxylase	Enzyme; Pyrimidine ribonucleotide biosynthesis	Orotidine-5'-phosphate decarboxylase; OMP decarboxylase	pyrF is in the PurR regulon (Marbach, 2012).	b1281
pyrG	None	CTP synthetase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Nucleotide interconversions	CTP synthase; CtpS	PyrG uses either glutamine or ammonia as the nitrogen source. PyrG(CtpS) forms filaments in vivo and in vitro (Ingerson-Mahar, 2010).	b2780
pyrI	None	aspartate carbamoyltransferase, regulatory subunit	Enzyme; Pyrimidine ribonucleotide biosynthesis	Aspartate carbamoyltransferase, regulatory subunit; aspartate transcarbamylase; ATCase; aspartate transcarbamoylase	HT_Cmplx5_Cyt: PyrB+PyrI.	b4244
queA	None	S-adenosylmethionine:tRNA ribosyltransferase-isomerase	Enzyme; Queuosine biosynthesis	S-adenosylmethionine:tRNA ribosyltransferase-isomerase; queuosine biosynthesis	Asn, Asp, Tyr, and His tRNA anticodons are modified. QueA converts 7-deazaguanine (preQ1-tRNA) to epoxyqueuosine (oQ-tRNA) in the penultimate step of Q-tRNA biosynthesis. The final step to make Q-tRNA from oQ-tRNA may be a cobamide-dependent reduction, but the gene is unknown (Frey, 1988). tgt mutants lack queuosine and are have reduced survival in stationary phase. (Noguchi, 1982).	b0405
racC	sbcA	Rac prophage; uncharacterized protein	Membrane; Phage or Prophage Related	Function unknown, Rac prophage	sbcA suppressor mutations allow expression of recE, in some cases by fusing to the upstream racC gene.	b1351
rbsA	rbsP, rbsT	D-ribose ABC transporter ATPase	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	D-ribose ABC transporter ATPase	Null	b3749
rbsB	prlB, rbsP	D-ribose ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein; ribose chemotaxis receptor	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	D-ribose ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein; ribose chemotaxis receptor	RbsB binds D-ribose and mediates chemotaxis to D-ribose through the Trg chemoreceptor. Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004). HT_Cmplx28_Mem: AlsB+RbsB. After four hours of Zn(II) stress, RbsB protein levels decreased (Easton, 2006).	b3751
rbsC	rbsP, rbsT	D-ribose ABC transporter permease	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	D-ribose ABC transporter permease	RbsC has 10 TM helices, with the N- and C-termini in the cytoplasm.	b3750
rbsD	rbsP	D-ribose pyranase	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	D-ribose pyranase; interconverts beta-pyran and beta-furan forms of D-ribose	RbsD is related to the fucose mutarotase FucU.	b3748
rbsK	None	ribokinase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Ribokinase	HT_Cmplx20_Cyt: Prs+RbsK.	b3752
rbsR	None	transcriptional repressor of ribose metabolism	Regulator; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Regulatory gene for rbs operon	Null	b3753
rcsA	cpsR	transcriptional regulator of colanic acid capsular biosynthesis	Regulator; Surface polysaccharides & antigens	Positive regulatory gene for capsule (colanic acid) synthesis; two regulatory proteins are derived from the same gene	Null	b1951
rcsB	viaA	response regulator in two-component regulatory system with RcsC and YojN	Regulator; Surface polysaccharides & antigens	Positive regulatory gene for capsule (colanic acid) synthesis	RcsB is acetylated at Lys180 by Pka(YfiQ) in vitro blocking its ability to bind to DNA, and Lys180 is deacetylated by CobB in vitro (Thao, 2010). GadE and phosphorylated RcsB form a protein complex to regulate glutamate-, arginine- and lysine-dependent acid resistance (Krin, 2010). Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004). HT_Cmplx42_Mem: RcsB+YfgM (Lasserre, 2006). YfgM may be an anti-RcsB factor (Westphal, 2012). 2/22 RcsB peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is not removed (Maillet, 2007). When RcsB is overexpressed, it reverses the ftsZ84 growth defect on low-salt medium. RcsB is required for the inducible acid resistance response (Johnson, 2011).	b2217
rcsC	None	hybrid sensory kinase in two-component regulatory system with RcsB and YojN	Enzyme; Surface polysaccharides & antigens	Negative regulatory gene for capsule (colanic acid) synthesis; contains TerF; predicted histidine kinase	Null	b2218
recA	lexB, recH, rnmB, srf, tif, umuB, umuR, zab	DNA recombination and repair protein; ssDNA-dependent ATPase; synaptase; ssDNA and dsDNA binding protein; ATP-dependent homologous DNA strand exchanger; recombinase A; LexA autocleavage cofactor	Enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	Multifunctional DNA recombination and repair protein; ssDNA-dependent ATPase; synaptase; ssDNA and dsDNA binding protein forming filaments; ATP-dependent homologous DNA strand exchanger; recombinase A; LexA autocleavage cofactor	The recA gene was initially identified by a mutation confering UV-sensitivity and causing more than a 1000-fold drop in conjugation recombination frequencies (Clark, 1965). RecA protein was initially observed as Protein X, a membrane protein induced after inhibition of cell division and DNA synthesis (Inouye, 1970). Protein X has been demonstrated to be the product of the recA gene (McEntee, 1977; Gudas, 1977; Emmerson, 1977; Little, 1977). Protein X (RecA) is transcriptionally induced by the inhibition of DNA synthesis to comprise 4% of total cell protein, 10% of which is membrane-bound (Gudas, 1976). RecA is an ATP-dependent dsDNA binding protein and is an ATP-independent, SSB-stimulated ssDNA binding protein, however the ssDNA-RecA complex is stabilized by NTPs (Gudas, 1976; McEntee, 1979; McEntee, 1981). The RecA C-terminal dsDNA binding domain contacts dsDNA at conserved residues W290, I298, G301 and K302 (Aihara, 1997). The dsDNA binding site of RecA also binds the displaced ssDNA strand (Mazin, 1998). RecA R244Q and K246N mutants are proficient in ssDNA binding but are defective in dsDNA binding (Kurumizaka, 1999). RecA does not bind to DNA with extensive cruciform structures, except in the presence of SSB. RecA-dependent autocleavage of the LexA repressor also requires ATP and DNA and signals the SOS response to DNA damage by inducing the LexA regulon. RecA-dependent autocleavage of UmuD is required for polV (UmuD'C) lesion bypass. RecA filamentation is inhibited by RecX. RecA-dependent autocleavage of phage repressors mediates prophage induction after exposure to DNA damaging agents such as UV irradiation. Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004).	b2699
recB	ior, rorA	exonuclease V (RecBCD complex), beta subunit	Enzyme; Degradation of DNA	RecBCD Exonuclease V subunit, recombination and repair; chi-activated RecBCD recombinase subunit; RecBCD 3'-5' slow helicase subunit; contains nuclease active site and ATP-binding site; RecB alone has 3'-5' helicase activity; binds RecC	RecBCD is a bipolar helicase.	b2820
recC	None	exonuclease V (RecBCD complex), gamma chain	Enzyme; Degradation of DNA	RecBCD Exonuclease V subunit, recombination and repair; chi-activated RecBCD recombinase subunit; binds RecB and RecD; may confer processivity on holoenzyme	RecBCD is a bipolar helicase.	b2822
recD	hopE	exonuclease V (RecBCD complex), alpha chain	Enzyme; Degradation of DNA	RecBCD Exonuclease V subunit, recombination and repair; recD mutants are constitutively activated for recombination; RecBCD 5'-3' fast helicase subunit; RecD alone has 5'-3' helicase activity; contains ATP-binding site; binds RecC; inhibits RecA loading	RecBCD is a bipolar helicase.	b2819
recE	rmuB, sbcA	Rac prophage; exonuclease VIII, 5' to 3' specific dsDNA exonuclease	Enzyme; Degradation of DNA; Phage or Prophage Related	RecET recombinase, exonuclease VIII, Rac prophage; recombination and repair; degrades one strand 5'-3' in duplex DNA	RecET promotes homologous recombinarion between short regions of homology, analagous to the lambda Red recombinase. sbcA suppressor mutations allow expression of recE, in some cases by fusing to the upstream racC gene.	b1350
recF	uvrF	gap repair protein	Regulator; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	Recombination and repair; antagonizes RecX inhibition of RecA filament formation	Null	b3700
recG	radC, spoV	ATP-dependent DNA helicase	Enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	Junction-specific ATP-dependent DNA helicase; facilitates branch migration of Holliday junctions; rewinding enzyme	Overexpression of RecG improves resistance to weak organic acids. recG and radC are allelic. See the ruvABC entries for additional information. otherPDB (T. maritima): 1GM5.	b3652
recJ	None	ssDNA exonuclease, 5' --> 3'-specific	Enzyme; Degradation of DNA	ssDNA 5'-3' exonuclease involved in recombination	RecJ has been N-terminally sequenced, but the native RBS was not used to direct translation, so it has been removed from the Verified Set (Lovett and Kolodner, 1989). The GTG start codon has been confirmed by mutational analysis (Haggerty and Lovett, 1997). OtherPDB (T. thermophilus): 2ZXP, 2ZXO, 2ZXR.	b2892
recN	radB	recombination and repair protein	Putative enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	Recombination and repair	LexA regulon.	b2616
recO	None	gap repair protein	Regulator; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	Conjugational recombination and repair; DNA-binding protein; RecA-like strand assimilation	Null	b2565
recQ	None	ATP-dependent DNA helicase	Enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	DNA helicase involved in recombination, replication, repair; ATP-dependent; monomeric	SSB binds to RecQ and stimulates DNA unwinding (Shereda, 2007). LexA regulon. The RecQ domain protein Psyr_3804 from Pseudomonas syringae has been identified as a toxin with the Smf domain protein Psyr_3805 as the antitoxin, although there is no indication that the E. coli RecQ/Smf form a toxin-antitoxin pair (Sberro, 2013).	b3822
recR	None	gap repair protein	Putative enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	Recombination and DNA repair	Null	b0472
relA	RC	(p)ppGpp synthetase I/GTP pyrophosphokinase	Enzyme; Global regulatory functions	ATP:GTP 3'-pyrophosphotransferase, ppGpp synthase I; GTP pyrophosphokinase; required for ppGpp synthesis during stringent response to amino acid starvation; self-regulated	RelA has two physically and functionally distinct domains, the N-terminal domain, amino acids 1 to 455, is responsible for (p)ppGpp synthesis, and the C-terminal domain, amino acids 456 to 744, is responsible for self-regulation.	b2784
relB	RC	antitoxin of the RelE-RelB toxin-antitoxin syste; transcriptional repressor	Regulator; Global regulatory functions; Phage or Prophage Related	Antitoxin for RelE, Qin prophage; transcriptional repressor of relB operon; mutants have a delayed relaxed regulation of RNA synthesis and slow recovery from starvation	Null	b1564
rep	dasC, mbrA, mmrA?	DNA helicase and single-stranded DNA-dependent ATPase	Enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	ATP-dependent DNA helicase Rep, involved in DNA replication; ssDNA-dependent ATPase; camphor resistance	The non-null mbrA4 allele of rep(mbrA) confers resistance to camphor and increases cellular DNA content (Trun, 1990; Trun, 2003). The mbrA4 allele is a synthetic lethal with rnhA (Trun, 1990).	b3778
hldD	gmhD, htrM, nbsB, rfaD, waaD	ADP-L-glycero-D-mannoheptose-6-epimerase, NAD(P)-binding	Enzyme; Surface polysaccharides & antigens	ADP-L-glycero-D-manno-heptose-6-epimerase; heat-inducible, LPS; allows high-temperature growth	Null	b3619
rfaH	hlyT, sfrB	transcription antitermination protein	Regulator; Macromolecule metabolism: Lipopolysaccharide	Transcription antitermination factor, LPS biosynthesis genes; negatively controls expression and surface presentation of Ag43 (Flu), reducing adhesion and biofilm; also regulates F-factor sex pilus and hemolysin genes	RfaH is recruited by JUMPstart/ops sequence elements.	b3842
wecA	rfe	UDP-GlcNAc:undecaprenylphosphate GlcNAc-1-phosphate transferase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Sugar-nucleotide biosynthesis, conversions	UDP-GlcNAc:undecaprenylphosphate GlcNAc-1-P transferase; ECA and O-antigen synthesis, tunicamycin sensitivity	Null	b3784
fliD	flbC, rfs	flagellar filament capping protein	Putative structure; Surface structures	Hook-associated protein 2, axial family	Flagellar regulon.	b1924
rhaR	rhaC1	transcriptional activator of rhaSR	Regulator; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Transcriptional activator for rhaSR, AraC family	A GTG start codon 31 codons internal to the previously annotated start codon is predicted based on conservation with Salmonella, eliminating the overlap with rhaS, and having a better RBS (E. Pradel, personal communication, July, 2007).	b3906
rhaS	rhaC2	transcriptional activator of rhaBAD and rhaT	Regulator; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Transcriptional activator for rhaBAD and rhaT, AraC family	Null	b3905
rhlB	mmrA?	ATP-dependent RNA helicase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	ATP-dependent RNA helicase; unwinds dsRNA; component of RNA degradosome; also binds PNPase directly; DEAD box family	Null	b3780
rho	hdf, nitA, nusD, psuA, rnsC, sbaA, sun, tabC, tsu	transcription termination factor	Factor; RNA synthesis, modification, DNA transcription	Transcription termination factor Rho; hexameric; RNA-dependent ATPase; ATP-dependent RNA helicase; bicyclomycin target	rho has been shown to be an essential gene (Das, 1976; Bubunenko, 2007).The rho mutants in the Keio collection have been shown to harbor an intact copy of rho in addition to the deletion allele (Yamamoto, 2009).	b3783
rhsA	None	Rhs protein with putative toxin 55 domain; putative polysaccharide synthesis/export protein; putative neighboring cell growth inhibitor	Null	Rhs protein with putative toxin 55 domain; putative polysaccharide synthesis/export protein; putative neighboring cell growth inhibitor	It has been suggested that all Rhs systems are involved in intercellular growth inhibition, suggesting that the Rhs proteins are secreted from E. coli and that the variable C-terminal domains are toxic to neighboring cells when secreted to the outside of the cell (Koskiniemi, 2013). RhsA could be cross-linked to Kps proteins in a K5+ K-12 strain; an rhsA mutant has reduced K5 polysaccharide biosynthesis in K-12 K5+ strain (McNulty, 2006). RhsA has 28 core RHS repeats including several repeats with YD dipeptides (Feulner, 1990). RhsA is a predicted polymorphic toxin that has a C-terminal conserved Toxin 55 domain that is a predicted RNase toxin (Pfam PF15606) that might be an intercellular growth inhibition module in that it also occurs in secreted bacterial insecticidal toxins and intercellular signaling proteins; the downstream yibA gene is predicted to encode an immunity gene (Zhang, 2012).	b3593
rhsB	None	Rhs protein with DUF4329 family putative toxin domain; putative neighboring cell growth inhibitor	Null	Rhs protein with DUF4329 family putative toxin domain; putative neighboring cell growth inhibitor	It has been suggested that all Rhs systems are involved in intercellular growth inhibition, suggesting that the Rhs proteins are secreted from E. coli and that the variable C-terminal domains are toxic to neighboring cells when secreted to the outside of the cell (Koskiniemi, 2013). rhsB is predicted to encode a polymorphic toxin and the downstream gene yhhH is predicted to encode an immunity protein (Zhang, 2012).	b3482
rhsC	None	Rhs protein with putative toxin domain; putative neighboring cell growth inhibitor	Null	Rhs protein with putative toxin domain; putative neighboring cell growth inhibitor	It has been suggested that all Rhs systems are involved in intercellular growth inhibition, suggesting that the Rhs proteins are secreted from E. coli and that the variable C-terminal domains are toxic to neighboring cells when secreted to the outside of the cell (Koskiniemi, 2013).	b0700
rhsD	None	Rhs protein with DUF4329 family putative toxin domain; putative neighboring cell growth inhibitor	Null	Rhs protein with DUF4329 family putative toxin domain; putative neighboring cell growth inhibitor	It has been suggested that all Rhs systems are involved in intercellular growth inhibition, suggesting that the Rhs proteins are secreted from E. coli and that the variable C-terminal domains are toxic to neighboring cells when secreted to the outside of the cell (Koskiniemi, 2013). rhsD has been predicted to encode a polymorphic toxin and the downstream gene encodes YbbC, a predicted immunity protein (Zhang, 2012).	b0497
rimI	None	ribosomal-protein-S18-alanine N-acetyltransferase	Enzyme; Ribosomes - maturation and modification	Ribosomal protein S18 N-acetyltransferase; modification of 30S ribosomal subunit protein S18; acetylation of N-terminal alanine	Null	b4373
rimJ	tcp	ribosomal-protein-S5-alanine N-acetyltransferase	Enzyme; Ribosomes - maturation and modification	Ribosomal protein S5 N-acetyltransferase; modification of 30S ribosomal subunit protein S5; acetylation of N-terminal alanine	Null	b1066
rimK	nek	ribosomal protein S6 modification protein	Structural component; Ribosomes - maturation and modification	Ribosomal protein S6 modification, C-terminal glutmate addition; polyglutamate synthase	RimK has poly-alpha-glutamic acid synthase activity in vitro, using glutamate as substrate (Kino, 2011).	b0852
rimL	None	ribosomal-protein-L7/L12-serine acetyltransferase	Enzyme; Ribosomes - maturation and modification	Ribosomal protein L7/L12 N-acetyltransferase; acetylation of N-terminal serine; microcin C and albomycin detoxifying acetyltransferase	RimL can acetylate and detoxify the peptide-nucleotide antibiotic microcin C, which is converted to an analog of aspartyl-adenylate in the cell and the antibiotic albomycin, which is converted to a seryl-thioribosyl pyrimidine in the cell (Kazakov, 2014). The acetylation of the N-terminal residue Ser-2 to N-acetylserine by RimL converts L12 to L7 (Terhorst, 1973).	b1427
rlpA	None	septal ring protein, suppressor of prc, minor lipoprotein	Membrane; Macromolecule synthesis, modification: Lipoprotein	Septal ring protein, suppressor of prc, minor lipoprotein	RlpA from P. aeruginosa is a lytic transglycosylase (Jorgenson, 2014). RlpA is a periplasmic lipoprotein with a C-terminal SPOR domain and rlpA is in a cluster of cell wall synthesis genes. RlpA localizes to the septal ring and to foci along the cell cylinder, but rlpA mutants do not have a cell division phenotype (Gerding, 2009; Arends, 2010). The first 17 aa are a type II signal peptide. 	b0633
lptE	rlpB	LPS assembly OM complex LptDE, lipoprotein component	Membrane; Macromolecule synthesis, modification: Lipoprotein	LPS assembly OM complex LptDE, LPS-binding lipoprotein component	LptDE is the terminal LPS OM receptor for ABC LPS exporter complex LptBFGC; LptE binds LPS (Chng, 2010). The first 18 aa of LptE are a type II signal peptide. The LptDE structure from S. flexneri (an E. coli strain) in PDB 4Q35 differs in only 3 amino acids out of 784 for LptD and 1/175 for LptE (Qiao, 2014).	b0641
rna	rnsA	ribonuclease I	Enzyme; Degradation of RNA	RNase I, periplasmic; endoribonuclease; RNase A; RNase M; RNase T2	Null	b0611
rnc	ranA	RNase III	Enzyme; Degradation of RNA	RNase III; cleaves double-stranded RNA	Four ribonucleases, Rnc, Rnr, Pnp and Rph, redundantly process the 3' 33 nucleotides of 16S rRNA (Sulthana, 2013). rnc is a non-essential gene and the failure to obtain a viable deletion mutant in the Keio collection is due to a polar effect on the downstream essential era gene (Takiff, 1989; Yu, 2000; Baba, 2006; Bubunenko, 2007).	b2567
rnd	None	ribonuclease D	Enzyme; Degradation of RNA	RNase D, processes tRNA precursors	Null	b1804
rne	ams, hmp1, smbB	endoribonuclease; RNA-binding protein;RNA degradosome binding protein	Enzyme; Degradation of RNA	RNase E; component of RNA degradosome; mRNA turnover; 5S and 16S RNA maturation	The degradosome is organized with a helical cytoskeletal localization (Taghbalout, 2007).	b1084
rnhA	cer, dasF, herA, rnh, sdrA, sin	ribonuclease HI, degrades RNA of DNA-RNA hybrids	Enzyme; Degradation of RNA	RNase HI; participates in DNA replication	The mbrA4 allele is a synthetic lethal with rnhA (Trun, 1990).	b0214
rnhB	None	ribonuclease HII, degrades RNA of DNA-RNA hybrids	Enzyme; Degradation of RNA	RNase HII; degrades RNA of DNA-RNA hybrids; nicks DNA 5' to misincorporated ribonucleotides	Null	b0183
rnpA	None	protein C5 component of RNase P	Enzyme; Degradation of RNA	RNase P, C5 protein component; involved in tRNA and 4.5S RNA-processing	A small peptide corresponding to the translation of an ORF antisense to the rnpA-yidD overlap was detected in a shotgun MS experiment (Krug, 2013). RnpA has leadzyme properties.	b3704
rph'	orfE	ribonuclease PH (defective)	Enzyme; Degradation of RNA	Pseudogene reconstruction, RNase PH	Four ribonucleases, Rnc, Rnr, Pnp and Rph, redundantly process the 3' 33 nucleotides of 16S rRNA in rph(wt) derivatives of E. coli K-12 (Sulthana, 2013). MG1655 has the rph-1 C-terminal frameshift mutation that severely reduces Rph activity. The wildtype protein sequence has been reconstructed and is presented. The rph-1 mutation is polar on the downstream pyrE gene, reducing PyrE activity and causing partial pyrimidine starvation when grown in minimal medium. The mutant protein is shorter (228 aa) and has a C-terminal sequence of ESNPL replacing GIESIVATQKAALAN. The frameshift is caused by a one base pair deletion of the first base (G) of codon 223.	b3643
rplA	rpy	50S ribosomal subunit protein L1	Structural component; Ribosomal proteins - synthesis, modification	50S ribosomal subunit protein L1	RplA lysines K105, K154, K186 and K197 can be modified to N6-succinyllysine (Zhang, 2011). RplA lysine K197 can be modified to N6-acetyllysine (Yu, 2008).	b3984
rplB	None	50S ribosomal subunit protein L2	Structural component; Ribosomal proteins - synthesis, modification	50S ribosomal subunit protein L2; binds Zn(II)	Null	b3317
rplC	None	50S ribosomal subunit protein L3	Structural component; Ribosomal proteins - synthesis, modification	50S ribosomal subunit protein L3	RplC lysine K38 can be modified to N6-succinyllysine (Zhang, 2011). The PrmB methyltransferase modifies RplC residue Q150 to N5-methylglutamine; a prmB mutant exhibits a cold-sensitive 50S subunit assembly defect (Lhoest, 1977; Lhoest, 1981; Arnold, 1999).	b3320
rplD	eryA	50S ribosomal subunit protein L4	Structural component; Ribosomal proteins - synthesis, modification	50S ribosomal subunit protein L4; erythromycin sensitivity	Null	b3319
rplE	None	50S ribosomal subunit protein L5	Structural component; Ribosomal proteins - synthesis, modification	50S ribosomal subunit protein L5; 5S rRNA-binding	rplE is an essential gene as judged by the inability to recombineer haploid deletions (Baba, 2006; Korepanov, 2007).	b3308
rplF	None	50S ribosomal subunit protein L6	Structural component; Ribosomal proteins - synthesis, modification	50S ribosomal subunit protein L6; gentamicin sensitivity	Null	b3305
rplI	None	50S ribosomal subunit protein L9	Structural component; Ribosomal proteins - synthesis, modification	50S ribosomal subunit protein L9	RplI lysines K71, K83 and K112 can be modified to N6-succinyllysine (Zhang, 2011). RplI lysines K57 and K89 can be modified to N6-acetyllysine (Yu, 2008; Zhang, 2009).	b4203
rplJ	None	50S ribosomal subunit protein L10	Structural component; Ribosomal proteins - synthesis, modification	50S ribosomal subunit protein L10; streptomycin resistance	Null	b3985
rplK	relC	50S ribosomal subunit protein L11	Structural component; Ribosomal proteins - synthesis, modification	50S ribosomal subunit protein L11; kasugamycin sensitivity	rplK is non-essential (Stöffler, 1980; Stöffler, 1981; van Dyke, 2003). rplK null mutants grow slowly, exhibiting high-temperature lethality and UAG suppression (van Dyke, 2003). The relC allele of rplK has a relaxed phenotype (Friesen, 1974; Parker, 1976). RplK has three residues trimethylated by the non-essential PrmA methyltransferase forming a blocking N-terminal N,N,N-trimethylalanine at residue A2 and forming two N6,N6,N6-trimethyllysines at residues K4 and K40 (Chang, 1975; Lederer, 1977; Dognin, 1980; Jerez, 1980; Vanet, 1994; Arnold, 1999). RplK lysines K72 and K81 can be modified to N6-succinyllysine (Zhang, 2011). Probably due to the slow growth phenotype of rplK mutations, the rplK mutants in the Keio collection have been shown to harbor an intact copy of rplK in addition to the deletion allele (Yamamoto, 2009).	b3983
rplL	None	50S ribosomal subunit protein L7/L12	Structural component; Ribosomal proteins - synthesis, modification	50S ribosomal subunit protein L7/L12	The acetylation of the N-terminal residue Ser-2 to N-acetylserine by RimL converts L12 to L7 (Terhorst, 1973).	b3986
rplM	None	50S ribosomal subunit protein L13	Structural component; Ribosomal proteins - synthesis, modification	50S ribosomal subunit protein L13; binds Zn(II)	Null	b3231
rplN	None	50S ribosomal subunit protein L14	Structural component; Ribosomal proteins - synthesis, modification	50S ribosomal subunit protein L14	Null	b3310
rplO	None	50S ribosomal subunit protein L15	Structural component; Ribosomal proteins - synthesis, modification	50S ribosomal subunit protein L15	Null	b3301
rplP	None	50S ribosomal subunit protein L16	Structural component; Ribosomal proteins - synthesis, modification	50S ribosomal subunit protein L16	Null	b3313
rplQ	None	50S ribosomal subunit protein L17	Structural component; Ribosomal proteins - synthesis, modification	50S ribosomal subunit protein L17	Null	b3294
rplR	None	50S ribosomal subunit protein L18	Structural component; Ribosomal proteins - synthesis, modification	50S ribosomal subunit protein L18; 5S rRNA-binding	rplR is an essential gene as judged by the inability to recombineer haploid deletions (Baba, 2006; Korepanov, 2007).	b3304
rplS	None	50S ribosomal subunit protein L19	Structural component; Ribosomal proteins - synthesis, modification	50S ribosomal subunit protein L19	Null	b2606
rplT	pdzA	50S ribosomal subunit protein L20	Structural component; Ribosomal proteins - synthesis, modification	50S ribosomal subunit protein L20	Null	b1716
rplV	eryB	50S ribosomal subunit protein L22	Structural component; Ribosomal proteins - synthesis, modification	50S ribosomal subunit protein L22; erythromycin sensitivity	Null	b3315
rplW	None	50S ribosomal subunit protein L23	Structural component; Ribosomal proteins - synthesis, modification	50S ribosomal subunit protein L23	Null	b3318
rplX	None	50S ribosomal subunit protein L24	Structural component; Ribosomal proteins - synthesis, modification	50S ribosomal subunit protein L24	Null	b3309
rplY	None	50S ribosomal subunit protein L25	Structural component; Ribosomal proteins - synthesis, modification	50S ribosomal subunit protein L25; 5S rRNA-binding 	rplY is a non-essential gene as judged by the ability to recombineer haploid deletions, however mutants lacking RplY grow slowly and have reduced protein synthesis, possibly due to a problem with ribosome recycling (Korepanov, 2007). Probably due to the slow growth phenotype of rplK mutations, the rplK mutants in the Keio collection have been shown to harbor an intact copy of rplK in addition to the deletion allele (Yamamoto, 2009).	b2185
rpmB	None	50S ribosomal subunit protein L28	Structural component; Ribosomal proteins - synthesis, modification	50S ribosomal subunit protein L28	Overexpression causes abnormal biofilm architecture and mucoidy. Downregulated twofold by GSNO in defined medium (anaerobic).	b3637
rpmC	None	50S ribosomal subunit protein L29	Structural component; Ribosomal proteins - synthesis, modification	50S ribosomal subunit protein L29	Null	b3312
rpmD	None	50S ribosomal subunit protein L30	Structural component; Ribosomal proteins - synthesis, modification	50S ribosomal subunit protein L30	Null	b3302
rpmE	None	50S ribosomal subunit protein L31	Structural component; Ribosomal proteins - synthesis, modification	50S ribosomal subunit protein L31	Null	b3936
rpmF	None	50S ribosomal subunit protein L32	Structural component; Ribosomal proteins - synthesis, modification	50S ribosomal subunit protein L32	Null	b1089
rpmG	None	50S ribosomal subunit protein L33	Structural component; Ribosomal proteins - synthesis, modification	50S ribosomal subunit protein L33	Downregulated twofold by GSNO in defined medium (anaerobic).	b3636
rpmH	rimA, ssaF	50S ribosomal subunit protein L34	Structural component; Ribosomal proteins - synthesis, modification	50S ribosomal subunit protein L34	Null	b3703
rpoA	pez, phs, sez	RNA polymerase, alpha subunit	Enzyme; RNA synthesis, modification, DNA transcription	RNA polymerase, alpha subunit; binds Zn(II)	HT_Cmplx11_Mem: RpoA+RpoB+RpoC. HT_Cmplx2_Cyt: RpoA+RpoB+RpoC.	b3295
rpoB	ftsR, groN, mbrD?, nitB, rif, ron, sdgB, stl, stv, tabD, tabG	RNA polymerase, beta subunit	Enzyme; RNA synthesis, modification, DNA transcription	RNA polymerase, beta subunit; binds Zn(II)	HT_Cmplx11_Mem: RpoA+RpoB+RpoC. HT_Cmplx2_Cyt: RpoA+RpoB+RpoC.	b3987
rpoC	tabB	RNA polymerase, beta prime subunit	Enzyme; RNA synthesis, modification, DNA transcription	RNA polymerase, beta' subunit; binds Zn(II)	HT_Cmplx11_Mem: RpoA+RpoB+RpoC. HT_Cmplx2_Cyt: RpoA+RpoB+RpoC.	b3988
rpoD	alt	RNA polymerase, sigma 70 (sigma D) factor	Factor; Global regulatory functions	RNA polymerase subunit, sigma 70, initiates transcription; housekeeping sigma	rpoD is an essential gene (Nakamura, 1983). The rpoD mutants in the Keio collection have been shown to harbor an intact copy of rpoD in addition to the deletion allele (Yamamoto, 2009). The tsaD-rpsUdnaGrpoD divergent operon promoter region binds ArcA and rpsU-dnaG-rpoD operon expression is activated by ArcA (Federowicz, 2014).	b3067
rpoH	fam, hin, htpR	RNA polymerase, sigma 32 (sigma H) factor	Factor; Global regulatory functions	RNA polymerase subunit, sigma 32, heat shock transcription	RpoH is phosphorylated at Tyr-260, in HTH DNA-binding region 4.2, attenuating activity. RpoH is de-phosphorylated by Etp. rpoH can be deleted, but null mutants do not grow above 20C (Zhou, 1988). Because a deletion was not isolated, it was classified as an essential gene by Baba (2006).	b3461
rpoN	glnF, ntrA	RNA polymerase, sigma 54 (sigma N) factor	Regulator; Global regulatory functions	RNA polymerase subunit, sigma 54; needed for expression of various regulons, promoter specificity set by various activator proteins required for sigma 54 recruitment	RpoN, aslo called sigma N, was originally identified as the sigma factor for nitrogen-controlled genes. The rpoN operon contains rpoN-hpf-ptsN-yhbJ-npr.	b3202
rpoZ	spoS	RNA polymerase, omega subunit	Enzyme; RNA synthesis, modification, DNA transcription	RNA polymerase subunit, omega subunit; assembly factor; chaperone-like function stabilizes RNAP	Stimulates ppGpp responsiveness of RNAP in vitro. Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004).	b3649
rpsA	ssyF	30S ribosomal subunit protein S1	Structural component; Ribosomal proteins - synthesis, modification	30S ribosomal subunit protein S1; subunit of RNA phage Q beta replicase; binds and stimulates RNAP	Coliphage Q beta replicase is comprised of the phage-encoded beta subunit and three bacterial proteins: TufB, Tsf and RpsA (Kondo, 1970; Kamen, 1970; Blumenthal, 1972; Wahba, 1974). RpsA is dispensible for RNA synthesis by coliphage Q beta replicase and is not part of the core replicase (Kamen, 1972; Hori, 1974; Landers, 1974). HT_Cmplx22_Cyt: DnaK+GrpE+GyrA+RpsA. HT_Cmplx30_Mem: ClpB+DnaK+InfB+RpsA.	b0911
rpsB	None	30S ribosomal subunit protein S2	Structural component; Ribosomal proteins - synthesis, modification	30S ribosomal subunit protein S2; binds Zn(II)	RpsB lysine K115 can be modified to N6-succinyllysine (Zhang, 2011). RpsB lysines K45 and K59 can be modified to N6-acetyllysine (Yu, 2008). rpsB is required for growth below 8C, which is enabled by transgenic Oleispira antarctica Cpn10/60. Lon substrate.	b0169
rpsC	None	30S ribosomal subunit protein S3	Structural component; Ribosomal proteins - synthesis, modification	30S ribosomal subunit protein S3	Null	b3314
rpsD	ramA, sud(2)	30S ribosomal subunit protein S4	Structural component; Ribosomal proteins - synthesis, modification	30S ribosomal subunit protein S4; NusA-like antitermination factor	RpsD can be modified by lysine acetylation in vitro using purified E. coli Pka(YfiQ) (Thao, 2010).	b3296
rpsE	eps, spc, spcA	30S ribosomal subunit protein S5	Structural component; Ribosomal proteins - synthesis, modification	30S ribosomal subunit protein S5	Null	b3303
rpsF	sdgH	30S ribosomal subunit protein S6	Structural component; Ribosomal proteins - synthesis, modification	30S ribosomal subunit protein S6; suppressor of dnaG-Ts	RpsF is modified posttranslationally by RimK, which adds four glutamic acid residues to the RpsF C-terminus.	b4200
rpsG	None	30S ribosomal subunit protein S7	Structural component; Ribosomal proteins - synthesis, modification	30S ribosomal subunit protein S7, mutated stop codon	The rpsG gene of K-12 has a mutation converting its stop codon to a Leu codon and extending S7 by 23 amino acids (Reinbolt, 1979). The extended rpsG UGA stop codon in K-12 is poorly recognized and an rluD mutation causes a severe growth defect in K-12 due to UGA readthrough and SsrA tagging; the rluD defect is further exacerbated by a prfB mutation also specific to K-12 (Dreyfus, 2011; Schaub, 2011). HT_Cmplx17_Mem: InfC+RpsG.	b3341
rpsH	None	30S ribosomal subunit protein S8	Structural component; Ribosomal proteins - synthesis, modification	30S ribosomal subunit protein S8	Null	b3306
rpsI	None	30S ribosomal subunit protein S9	Structural component; Ribosomal proteins - synthesis, modification	30S ribosomal subunit protein S9	rpsI can be deleted, but null mutants grow slowly and express kanamycin resistance weakly (Bubunenko, 2007). Possibly because mutants grow poorly on kanamycin plates, an rpsI deletion is not present in the Keio collection, leading to its misclassification as an essential gene (Baba, 2006).	b3230
rpsJ	nusE	30S ribosomal subunit protein S10	Structural component; Ribosomal proteins - synthesis, modification	30S ribosomal subunit protein S10	Null	b3321
rpsK	None	30S ribosomal subunit protein S11	Structural component; Ribosomal proteins - synthesis, modification	30S ribosomal subunit protein S11	Null	b3297
rpsL	asuB, strA	30S ribosomal subunit protein S12	Structural component; Ribosomal proteins - synthesis, modification	30S ribosomal subunit protein S12; RNA chaperone	RimO catalyzes the methylthiolation of Asp-89 of ribosomal protein S12 to form 3-methylthioaspartic acid (Kowalak, 1996; Anton, 2008). YcaO is required for the efficient in vivo RimO-dependent beta-methylthiolation of ribosomal protein S12 (RpsL) on Asp-89 (Strader, 2011). Asp-88 of the mature RpsL is Asp-89 of the unmodified protein. RpsL lysine K108 can be modifed to N6-acetyllysine (Zhang, 2009). Mutations in regions 41-45 (except when Lys42 is replaced with Arg), 87-93 and 53 result in streptomycin resistance. A point mutation at basepair 262 from A to G sustains protein synthesis in late stationary phase and increases the stability of the 70S complex in low magnesium concentrations.	b3342
rpsM	None	30S ribosomal subunit protein S13	Structural component; Ribosomal proteins - synthesis, modification	30S ribosomal subunit protein S13	rpsM can be deleted, but null mutants grow slowly and express kanamycin resistance weakly (Bubunenko, 2007), which may explain why a deletion was not isolated by Baba (2006), leading to its misclassification as an essential gene.	b3298
rpsN	None	30S ribosomal subunit protein S14	Structural component; Ribosomal proteins - synthesis, modification	30S ribosomal subunit protein S14	Null	b3307
rpsO	secC	30S ribosomal subunit protein S15	Structural component; Ribosomal proteins - synthesis, modification	30S ribosomal subunit protein S15	rpsO can be deleted, but null mutants grow slowly (Bubunenko, 2007). Probably due to the slow growth phenotype of rpsO mutations, the rpsO mutants in the Keio collection have been shown to harbor an intact copy of rpsO in addition to the deletion allele (Yamamoto, 2009).	b3165
rpsP	None	30S ribosomal subunit protein S16	Structural component; Ribosomal proteins - synthesis, modification	30S ribosomal subunit protein S16; endonuclease	Null	b2609
rpsQ	neaA	30S ribosomal subunit protein S17	Structural component; Ribosomal proteins - synthesis, modification	30S ribosomal subunit protein S17	rpsQ can be deleted, but null mutants grow slowly and express kanamycin resistance weakly (Bubunenko, 2007), which may explain why a deletion was not isolated by Baba (2006), leading to its misclassification as an essential gene.	b3311
rpsR	None	30S ribosomal subunit protein S18	Structural component; Ribosomal proteins - synthesis, modification	30S ribosomal subunit protein S18	Null	b4202
rpsS	None	30S ribosomal subunit protein S19	Structural component; Ribosomal proteins - synthesis, modification	30S ribosomal subunit protein S19	Null	b3316
rpsT	sup(s20)	30S ribosomal subunit protein S20	Structural component; Ribosomal proteins - synthesis, modification	30S ribosomal subunit protein S20	Null	b0023
rpsU	None	30S ribosomal subunit protein S21	Structural component; Ribosomal proteins - synthesis, modification	30S ribosomal subunit protein S21	rpsU has been shown to be an essential gene (Bubunenko, 2007). The rpsU mutants in the Keio collection have been shown to harbor an intact copy of rpsU in addition to the deletion alelle (Yamamoto, 2009). The tsaD-rpsUdnaGrpoD divergent operon promoter region binds ArcA and rpsU-dnaG-rpoD operon expression is activated by ArcA (Federowicz, 2014).	b3065
ftnA	ftn, gen-165, rsgA	ferritin iron storage protein (cytoplasmic)	Carrier; Transport of small molecules: Cations	Ferritin, major cytoplasmic iron storage protein	FtnA helps re-assemble iron-sulfur clusters after oxidative damage (Bitoun, 2008).	b1905
coaA	panK, rts, ts-9	pantothenate kinase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Pantothenate	Pantothenate kinase	coaA is an essential gene (Vallari, 1987). The coaA mutants in the Keio collection have been shown to harbor an intact copy of coaA in addition to the deletion allele (Yamamoto, 2009).	b3974
ruvA	None	component of RuvABC resolvasome, regulatory subunit	Enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	Holliday junction recognition factor, recruits RuvB; works in conjunction with RuvB helicase to drive branch migration during recombination	Binds Holliday junction as two tetramers (an octamer) and each tetrameric half recruits one RuvB hexameric helicase. RuvAB may also directly convert replication forks into Holliday junctions. Required for replication forks reversal in certain replication mutants. LexA regulon. RuvA may be a sliding collar that protects Holliday junctions from unwinding while promoting branch migration	b1861
ruvB	None	ATP-dependent DNA helicase, component of RuvABC resolvasome	Enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	DNA helicase driving branch migration during recombination; hexameric ring	May directly convert replication forks into Holliday junctions. Required for replication forks reversal in certain replication mutants. ATP-dependent. LexA regulon.	b1860
ruvC	None	component of RuvABC resolvasome, endonuclease	Enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	RuvC endonuclease, Holliday structure resolvase; not SOS regulated	Null	b1863
sbcB	cpeA, xonA	exodeoxyribonuclease I; exonuclease I	Enzyme; Degradation of DNA	Exodeoxyribonuclease I, exonuclease I, suppressor of recBC	The sbcB gene encodes exonuclease I (Kushner, 1971). The C-terminus of Ssb binds and stimulates Exonuclease I activity (Lu, 2008). 	b2011
sbcC	rmuA	exonuclease, dsDNA, ATP-dependent	Enzyme; Degradation of DNA	DNA hairpin dsDNA 3'-exonuclease SbcCD, Mn(2+), ATP-dependent; ATP-independent 5' ssDNA endonuclease; required for recombinational repair of dsDNA breaks; cosuppressor with sbcB of recB recC mutations; heterodimeric	SbcCD can cleave dsDNA 5' ends sealed by a hairpin or by covalent linko a protein. SbcCD limits recombination between short inverted repeats, but is also reported to be required for palindrome-stimulated deletion. SbcCD protein forms a large 1.2 megadalton complex. Second amino acid was sequenced in protein as Gly, but in all DNA samples is a Lys codon. SbcC is a coiled coil protein.	b0397
sbmA	None	peptide antibiotic transporter	Putative membrane; Drug/analog sensitivity	Peptide antibiotic transporter	SbmA is an inner membrane transporter that imports and confers sensitivity to microcin 25 (Salomón, 1995). sbmA mutants are resistant to microcin B17 (Laviña, 1986). sbmA mutants are resistant to the proline-rich antimicrobial peptide pyrrhocoricin (Narayanan, 2014). SbmA mediates the import of peptide nucleic acid (PNA) oligomers into the cytoplasm (Ghosal, 2013).	b0377
sbp	None	sulfate transporter subunit	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Anions	Sulfate-binding protein, periplasmic	Sbp is part of the CysAWUP-Sbp ABC transporter, also known as CysAWTP. CysP is the periplasmic binding protein for thiosulfate, but genetic evidence suggests that Sbp can partially compensate for a loss of CysP.	b3917
sdaA	None	L-serine dehydratase 1	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Amino acids	L-serine dehydratase 1; also known as serine deaminase; L-SD1	Null	b1814
sdhA	None	succinate dehydrogenase, flavoprotein subunit	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: TCA cycle	Succinate dehydrogenase (SQR) flavoprotein subunit; succinate:ubiquinone oxidoreductase (SQR); complex II of aerobic respiration	The crystal structure shows that His45 of SdhA is covalently modified with FAD to form tele-8alpha-FAD histidine (Yankovskaya, 2003). E. coli SdhE(YgfY, CbtB) can complement the growth defect associated with a Serratia ygfX sdhE double mutant; Serratia SdhE was shown to bind FAD and to facilitate the flavinylation of SdhA in vitro; an E. coli sdhE(cbtB) mutant has an inactive succinate dehydrogenase (McNeil, 2012). His45 was predicted to be the site of SdhA flavinylation with FAD by similarity to the sequenced histidine-modified bovine heart flavopeptide SHTVAAXGGIBLAAGBMDEBXWR (Kenney, 1972; Wood, 1984). In vitro flavinylation of SdhA using crude extracts was stimulated by citrate, isocitrate, succinate and fumarate (Brandsch, 1989). The sdhABCD operon is negatively regulated by ryhB RNA as part of indirect positive regulation by Fur. Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004).	b0723
sdhB	None	succinate dehydrogenase, FeS subunit	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: TCA cycle	Succinate dehydrogenase (SQR) iron-sulfur protein; succinate:ubiquinone oxidoreductase (SQR); complex II of aerobic respiration	The sdhABCD operon is negatively regulated by ryhB RNA as part of indirect positive regulation by Fur.	b0724
sdhC	cybA	succinate dehydrogenase, membrane subunit, binds cytochrome b556	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: TCA cycle	Succinate dehydrogenase (SQR) cytochrome b556; membrane anchor; succinate:ubiquinone oxidoreductase (SQR); complex II of aerobic respiration	The sdhABCD operon is negatively regulated by ryhB RNA as part of indirect positive regulation by Fur.	b0721
sdhD	None	succinate dehydrogenase, membrane subunit, binds cytochrome b556	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: TCA cycle	Succinate dehydrogenase (SQR) hydrophobic subunit; succinate:ubiquinone oxidoreductase (SQR); complex II of aerobic respiration	The sdhABCD operon is negatively regulated by ryhB RNA as part of indirect positive regulation by Fur.	b0722
sdiA	uvrX	quorum-sensing transcriptional activator	Regulator; Cell division	Quorum-sensing ftsQAZ-P2, acrABCDE transcriptional activator; fluoroquinolone resistance; overproduction confers drug resistance by stimulating the acr genes; SdiA senses exogenous N-acyl homoserine lactones	Suppresses inhibitory effect of the MinC/MinD division inhibitor. N-acyl homoserine lactones act as folding switches for SdiA. LuxR family. SdiA has other global transcription targets such as uvrY, csrB, recN and nei. E. coli makes an unknown weak auto-inducer when grown in rich media. Most phenotypic effects require overproduction of SdiA. sdiA mutants are more sensitive to fluoroquinolones and have reduced AcrB protein, but are not defective in cell division. An sdiA ydiV double mutant has twofold reduced cAMP levels than inhibits quorum sensing system 2 (Zhou, 2008).	b1916
secA	azi, pea, prlD	preprotein translocase subunit, ATPase	Transport; Protein, peptide secretion	Preprotein translocase secAYEG receptor/ATPase subunit; autogenous translational repressor; ATP-dependent helicase activity on secMA mRNA; homodimeric/monomeric	SecA alone can mediate protein export, albeit at low efficiency, indicating the ability of SecA to from protein-conducting channels (Hsieh, 2011). SecA binds and targets preprotein-secB complexes to the secYEG membrane-imbedded translocon, and is the translocase ATPase subunit driving proteins through the inner membrane. SecA targets protein precursors to the SecYE core translocon for secretion. The SecA helicase activity is dispensable for both functions. Oligomerization induced by signal peptides. secA is regulated by the secretion competence of the SecM signal peptide. HT_Cmplx33_Cyt: AcpP+PurB+SecA. HT_Cmplx48_Mem: SecA+YdgA+YjiY.	b0098
secB	None	protein export chaperone	Transport; Protein, peptide secretion	Protein export chaperone; SecB helps SecA deliver proteins to the SecYEG translocon; general protein chaperone	The penultimate Ser residue that is missing from the purified SecB protein could be a proteolytic artifact.	b3609
secD	None	SecYEG protein translocase auxillary subunit	Transport; Protein, peptide secretion	SecDFyajC inner membrane secretion protein complex subunit; assists the SecYEG translocon to interact with SecA and export proteins	SecYEG complex interacts with SecDFyajC to form a hexameric holocomplex.	b0408
secE	mbrC, prlG	preprotein translocase membrane subunit	Transport; Protein, peptide secretion	SecYEG inner membrane translocon core subunit; preprotein translocase secAYEG subunit; core translocon secYE subunit	SecYEG complex interacts with SecDFyajC to form a hexameric holocomplex. mbrC17 is a point mutation 23 nt before secE that increases secE and nusG expression, resulting in a suppression of camphor resistance by increasing cellular DNA content (Trun, 1991; Estevenon, 1997).	b3981
secF	None	SecYEG protein translocase auxillary subunit	Transport; Protein, peptide secretion	SecDFyajC inner membrane secretion protein complex subunit; assists the SecYE core translocon to interact with SecA and export proteins	SecYEG complex interacts with SecDFyajC to form a hexameric holocomplex. 	b0409
selA	fdhA	selenocysteine synthase	Enzyme; Aminoacyl tRNA synthetases, tRNA modification	Selenocysteine synthase; with SelD, converts serine residue to selenocysteine on tRNA; contains pyridoxal 5-phosphate	Null	b3591
selB	fdhA	selenocysteinyl-tRNA-specific translation factor	Factor; Proteins - translation and modification	Elongation factor promoting selenocysteine incorporation; specific for selenocysteyl tRNA	Null	b3590
selD	fdhB	selenophosphate synthase	Enzyme; Aminoacyl tRNA synthetases, tRNA modification	Selenophosphate synthase, ATP-dependent; reduced selenium donor for selenocysteic tRNA synthesis and for the modification of several tRNAs to contain 5-methylaminomethyl-2-selenouridine	Null	b1764
serA	None	D-3-phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Serine	D-3-Phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase	Null	b2913
serB	None	3-phosphoserine phosphatase	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Serine	Phosphoserine phosphatase; HAD9	HAD superfamily.	b4388
serC	pdxC, pdxF	3-phosphoserine/phosphohydroxythreonine aminotransferase	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Serine	Phosphoserine aminotransferase	Null	b0907
serS	None	seryl-tRNA synthetase	Enzyme; Aminoacyl tRNA synthetases, tRNA modification	Serine--tRNA ligase; serine hydroxamate resistance	8/587 SerS peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is not removed (Maillet, 2007).	b0893
maeA	sfcA	malate dehydrogenase, decarboxylating, NAD-requiring; malic enzyme	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Gluconeogenesis	Malic enzyme, NAD-dependent; NAD-ME	MaeA catalyzes four reactions: I, NAD-dependent L-malate decarboxylation; II, NAD-independent oxalacetate decarboxylation; III, oxalacetate reductase, NAD-dependent; !V, pyruvate reductase, NAD-dependent. Acetyl-CoA and ATP are allosteric inhibitors; aspartate is an allosteric activator. Reaction I proceeds by two steps: dehydrogenation, then decarboxylation. 6/208 peptide masses from MS analysis indicate that an upstream start codon is utilized, but the start nine codons upstream does not have a recognizable RBS, and the upstream sequences are not conserved (Maillet, 2007).	b1479
sfsA	sfs, sfs1	sugar fermentation stimulation protein A	Putative regulator; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Sugar fermentation stimulation protein A; overexpression increases maltose utilization; stimulates MalQ	Null	b0146
slt	sltY	lytic murein transglycosylase, soluble	Enzyme; Murein sacculus, peptidoglycan	Soluble lytic murein transglycosylase Slt70, major autolysin, periplasmic	MltB is a soluble endolytic transglycosylase and an exolytic transglycosylase that can degrade both non-crosslinked and crosslinked murein chains (Lee, 2013). Slt cleaves the glycosidic bonds between the N-acetylmuramic acid and N-acetylglucosamine residues in murein. Slt has a C-terminal lysozyme-like domain.	b4392
ytjB	smp	SMP_2 family putative membrane-anchored periplasmic protein	Membrane; Not classified	SMP_2 family predicted membrane-anchored periplasmic protein; function unknown	YtjB(smp) is a membrane bound protein (Neuwald, 1989). YtjB(Smp) is a member of the bacterial virulence factor haemolysin family (SMP_2; Pfam PF10144). YtjB has a predicted uncleavable signal anchor (residues 13-32) and probably is largely periplasmic; a predicted second transmembrane helix (residues 164-184) indicates that the C-terminal 29 residues of YtjB(Smp) may be in the cytoplasm. ytjB is transcribed divergently from serB from overlapping promoters. YtjB(smp) is homologous to ahpA of P. multocida, which induces anaerobic expression of the cryptic hemolysin HlyE(SheA) when cloned in E. coli	b4387
bamE	smpA, smqA	lipoprotein component of BamABCDE OM biogenesis complex	Null	Lipoprotein stabilizer of BamABCDE OM biogenesis complex	bamE(smpA) mutants are sensitive to rifampin, vancomycin, cholate, and SDS/EDTA, indicating an OM defect (Sklar, 2007). A bamE(smpA) bamB double mutant is non-viable (Sklar, 2007). SmpA is homologous to P. aeruginosa lipoprotein OmlA. The first 19 aa of BamE are predicted to be a type II signal peptide. A mutation of Cys20 severely reduces bamE complementation of vancomycin resistance (Knowles, 2011). Although a direct biochemical demonstration that E. coli BamE is a lipoprotein appears to be lacking, the supporting evidence is very strong.	b2617
sodA	None	superoxide dismutase, Mn	Enzyme; Detoxification	Superoxide dismutase, Mn	SoxRS regulon. Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004). sodA mutants are sensitive to plumbagin (Lin, 2010).	b3908
sodB	None	superoxide dismutase, Fe	Enzyme; Detoxification	Superoxide dismutase, Fe; response to oxidative stress; chromate resistance; negatively regulated by ryhB RNA as part of indirect positive regulation by Fur; acid-inducible	Null	b1656
prlF	sohA	antitoxin of the SohA(PrlF)-YhaV toxin-antitoxin system	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Antitoxin of the PrlF-YhaV toxin-antitoxin pair; extragenic suppressor of htrA; autoregulator	Null	b3129
sohB	None	inner membrane protein, S49 peptidase family protein	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Inner membrane S49 family predicted peptidase; multicopy suppressor of degP(htrA)	SohB has one central transmembrane seqment (residues 190-207), an N-terminal periplasmic domain (PF08496, and a C-terminal cytoplasmic domain (PF01343) (Daley, 2005). SohB is homologous to inner membrane protease IV, which digests cleaved signal peptides.	b1272
soxR	marC	redox-sensitive transcriptional activator of soxS; autorepressor	Regulator; Global regulatory functions	Redox-sensitive transcriptional activator for soxS; AraC family	SoxR responds to redox-cycling drugs directly rather than to superoxide (Gu, 2011). SoxR activates the SoxS global regulator in a regulatory cascade; SoxR is reduced by RseC and RsxABCDGE.	b4063
soxS	None	superoxide response regulon transcriptional activator; autoregulator	Regulator; Global regulatory functions	Global transcription regulator for superoxide response; AraC family	Induces sox regulon when superoxide levels increase. Induced during biofilm formation. SoxS is unstable except in a lon ftsH double mutant. This unstability is suggested to play a role in the rapid return of the regulon's gene expression to preinduced levels.	b4062
speA	None	biosynthetic arginine decarboxylase, PLP-binding	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Polyamine biosynthesis	Biosynthetic decarboxylase	Null	b2938
speB	None	agmatinase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Polyamine biosynthesis	Agmatinase; agmatine ureohydrolase	HT_Cmplx35_Cyt: DapD+SpeB. 14/140 SpeB peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed (Maillet, 2007).	b2937
speC	None	ornithine decarboxylase, constitutive	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Polyamine biosynthesis	Ornithine decarboxylase	Null	b2965
speD	None	S-adenosylmethionine decarboxylase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Polyamine biosynthesis	S-adenosylmethionine decarboxylase, spermidine biosynthesis; two subunits by cleavage: residues 1-111 are the beta chain and 112-264 are the alpha chain (153 aa)	Paraquat toxicity observed in cells deficient in spermidine. The N-terminus of the SpeD alpha chain, Ser112, is modified to pyrivic acid.	b0120
speE	None	spermidine synthase (putrescine aminopropyltransferase)	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Polyamine biosynthesis	Spermidine synthase	Paraquat toxicity observed in cells deficient in spermidine. 	b0121
speF	None	ornithine decarboxylase isozyme, inducible	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Polyamine biosynthesis	Ornthine decarboxylase, inducible	Lack of cadBA opereon induction results in an increase in speF-potE operon expression.	b0693
gmk	spoR	guanylate kinase	Enzyme; Purine ribonucleotide biosynthesis	Guanylate kinase	8/66 Gmk peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed (Maillet, 2007).	b3648
spoT	None	bifunctional (p)ppGpp synthetase II/ guanosine-3',5'-bis pyrophosphate 3'-pyrophosphohydrolase	Enzyme; Global regulatory functions	ppGpp 3'-pyrophosphohydrolase and ppGpp synthase II; guanosine-3',5'-bis(diphosphate) 3'-pyrophosphohydrolase	ObgE(CgtA) binds SpoT and pre-50S ribosomes, ObgE(CgtA) increases ppGpp degradation by pre-50S ribosome-associated SpoT, and an obgE(cgtA) mutant has an elevated ppGpp level during growth, but not during the RelA-dependent stringent response (Jiang, 2007).	b3650
trmH	spoU	tRNA mG18-2'-O-methyltransferase, SAM-dependent	Enzyme; tRNA modification	tRNA mG18 2'-O-methyltransferase, SAM-dependent	Null	b3651
sppA	None	protease IV (signal peptide peptidase)	Enzyme; Degradation of proteins, peptides, glyco	Protease IV, signal peptide peptidase	The role of SppA during cleaved signal peptide degradation in vivo is unknown; an sppA mutant was unaffected in Lpp signal peptide degradation in vivo; RseP and other unidentified proteases may be the real signal peptide peptidases (Saito, 2011). SppA is a perplasmic protease anchored to the inner membrane by an N-terminal transmembrane domain that digests spent signal peptides imbedded in the inner membrane in vitro (Wang, 2008).	b1766
srlA	gutA, sbl	glucitol/sorbitol-specific enzyme IIC component of PTS	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	D-sorbitol-specific enzyme II of phosphotransferase system	Glucitol is a less common synonym for sorbitol.	b2702
srlB	gutB	glucitol/sorbitol-specific enzyme IIA component of PTS	Enzyme; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	D-sorbitol-specific enzyme III of the phosphotransferase system	Glucitol is a less common synonym for sorbitol.	b2704
srlD	gutD	sorbitol-6-phosphate dehydrogenase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Sorbitol-6-phosphate dehydrogenase	Glucitol is a less common synonym for sorbitol.	b2705
srlM	gutM	sorbitol=responsive srl operon transcriptional activator	Regulator; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	srl operon transcriptional activator, sorbitol-responsive	Glucitol is a less common synonym for sorbitol. gutM has been changed to srlM for consistency.	b2706
srlQ	gutQ	D-arabinose 5-phosphate isomerase	Null	D-arabinose 5-phosphate isomerase	SrlQ is homologous to KpsF and KdsD. A kdsD srlQ double mutant is a synthetic lethal. 9/76 SrlQ peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed (Maillet, 2007). Glucitol is a less common synonym for sorbitol. gutQ has been changed to srlQ for consistency.	b2708
srlR	gutR	sorbitol-inducible srl operon transcriptional repressor	Regulator; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	srl operon transcriptional repressor, sorbitol-inducible	Glucitol is a less common synonym for sorbitol.	b2707
srmB	rbaB, rhlA	ATP-dependent RNA helicase	Enzyme; RNA synthesis, modification, DNA transcription	ATP-dependent RNA helicase, 50S ribosomal subunit biogenesis; suppresses 50S ribosome assembly defect of rplX(ts); required for effiicient ribosomal 50S subunit assembly; stabilizes exposed mRNA, possibly by protecting or destabilizing secondary structure	RNA-stimulated ATPase activity and ATP-dependent RNA helciase activities have been demonstrated in vitro for SrmB (Bizebard, 2004). SrmB binds RNaseE. srmB deletion mutant has slow growth phenotype at low temperature.	b2576
ssb	exrB, lexC	single-stranded DNA-binding protein	Factor; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	Single-stranded DNA-binding protein; alkali-inducible; homotetramer	RarA(MgsA) co-purifies with SSB; the DNA-dependent ATPase activity of RarA(MgsA) is inhibited by SSB (Page, 2011). SSB binds to RecQ and stimulates DNA unwinding (Shereda, 2007). Secondary structure of DNA does not effect binding of SSB. SSB increases the binding of RecA in DNA with secondary structure. LexA regulon.	b4059
sspA	pog, ssp	stringent starvation protein A, phage P1 late gene activator, RNAP-associated acid-resistance protein, inactive glutathione S-transferase homolog	Regulator; Global regulatory functions	Stringent starvation protein A, phage P1 late gene activator; RNAP-associated acid-resistance protein; inactive glutathione S-transferase homolog	SspA is an RNAP-associated transcriptional activator of phage P1 late genes (Ishihama, 1979; Williams, 1991; Williams, 1994; Hansen, 2003). The SspA-mediated down-regulation of H-NS is needed for stationary phase-induced acid tolerance (Hansen, 2005). OtherPDB(Y.pestis):1YY7 (Hansen, 2005). SspA lacks GST activity and does not bind glutathione (Hansen, 2005).	b3229
sspB	None	ClpXP protease specificity enhancing factor	Regulator; Global regulatory functions	Specificity-enhancing factor for ClpXP protease, binds ssrA-tagged proteins; ribosome-associated stress response protein; homodimeric	Null	b3228
sucA	lys	2-oxoglutarate decarboxylase, thiamine triphosphate-binding	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: TCA cycle	2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase, E1 component; yields succinyl-CoA and CO(2); also known as alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase	sucAB is a synthetic lethal with sucCD.	b0726
sucB	None	dihydrolipoyltranssuccinase	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: TCA cycle	2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase, E2 component; dihydrolipoamide succinyltransferase; acid-inducible; yields succinyl-CoA and CO(2); also known as alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase	sucAB is a synthetic lethal with sucCD. Residues 104-153 is the E3(Lpd) component binding domain, called the peripheral subunit binding domain (PSBD). When the isolated 50 aa PSBD domain is produced as a protein it is called BBL, which is structured at low temperature and may be an example of a downhill protein folding (Packman, 1986; Garcia-Mira, 2002). This controversial topic, centered around experiments with a naphthyl-alanine derivative of BBL termed Naf-BBL, has a topic page with additional citations.	b0727
sucC	None	succinyl-CoA synthetase, beta subunit	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: TCA cycle	Succinyl CoA synthase beta-subunit; acid-inducible	sucCD is a synthetic lethal with sucAB. Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004). HT_Cmplx6_Cyt: SucC+SucD.	b0728
sucD	None	succinyl-CoA synthetase, NAD(P)-binding, alpha subunit	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: TCA cycle	Succinyl CoA synthase alpha-subunit	sucCD is a synthetic lethal with sucAB. SucD is down 5X during growth at 4C (enabled by Oleispira antarctica Cpn10/60 transgene). Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004). HT_Cmplx6_Cyt: SucC+SucD.	b0729
suhB	ssyA	inositol monophosphatase	Phenotype; Global regulatory functions	Inositol-1-monophosphatase; mutation suppresses TS growth phenotype of rpoH15, dnaB121, and secY24; suhB mutations confers CS growth	The N-terminal sequence was determined using protein made with a synthetic RBS, and thus is not a confirmation of the in vivo start site; the N-terminal Met was not clipped off the recombinant protein.	b2533
sulA	sfiA	SOS cell division inhibitor	Phenotype; Cell division	Inhibits cell division and ftsZ ring formation; lexA regulon	Null	b0958
surA	None	peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase (PPIase)	Phenotype; Not classified	Periplasmic OM porin chaperone, has PPIase activity; required for stationary-phase survival	Parvulin (ppiC) family. SurA contains two PPIase domains. PPIase domain I is inactive; PPIase activity is not required for porin maturation (Behrens, 2001). An fkpA, surA, ppiB, ppiD quadruple mutant is viable (Justice, 2005).	b0053
tag	tagA	3-methyl-adenine DNA glycosylase I, constitutive	Enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	3-methyladenine DNA glycosylase I, contains Zn(II)	Tag is constitutively expressed.	b3549
tap	None	methyl-accepting protein IV	Regulator; Chemotaxis and mobility	Dipeptide chemoreceptor, methyl-accepting; MCP IV; flagellar regulon	Tap sense dipeptides indirectly through the periplasmic dipeptide binding protein DppA. Tap is a low-abundance chemoreceptor, 5- 10-fold lower than Tar and Tsr. Tap can function as a cold receptor during thermotaxis. Tap senses low pH as a repellent.	b1885
tar	cheM	methyl-accepting chemotaxis protein II	Regulator; Chemotaxis and mobility	Aspartate, maltose chemoreceptor, methyl-accepting; MCP II; also senses repellents cobalt and nickel; flagellar regulon	Tar senses maltose indirectly through periplasmic maltose binding protein. Tar can function as a warm receptor during thermotaxis.	b1886
tdcA	None	tdc operon transcriptional activator	Regulator; Degradation of small molecules: Amino acids	Transcriptional activator of tdc operon	Null	b3118
tdcB	None	L-threonine dehydratase, catabolic	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Amino acids	L-threonine dehydratase, catabolic, PLP-dependent; also known as threonine deaminase	The structure of Salmonella typhimurium TcdB has been determined (Simanshu, 2006). otherPDB: 1GN0, 1GN1, 1GN2.	b3117
tdcC	None	L-threonine/L-serine transporter	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	Serine/threonine:H+ symport permease	HAAAP family. Anaerobically inducible.	b3116
tdcR	None	L-threonine dehydratase operon activator protein	Regulator; Degradation of small molecules: Amino acids	Threonine dehydratase operon activator protein	Null	b3119
tdh	None	L-threonine 3-dehydrogenase, NAD(P)-binding	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Amino acids	Threonine dehydrogenase	Null	b3616
tdk	None	thymidine kinase/deoxyuridine kinase	Enzyme; Salvage of nucleosides and nucleotides	Deoxythymidine kinase	Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004). 5/88 Tdk peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed (Maillet, 2007).	b1238
tesB	None	acyl-CoA thioesterase 2	Enzyme; Fatty acid and phosphatidic acid biosynthesis	Acyl-CoA thioesterase 2	TesB is a member of the HotDog superfamily of thioesterases and dehydratases (Pfam CL0050, PF02551; PDB 1CBU) (Li, 2000; Dillon, 2004).	b0452
tgt	vacC(S.f.)	tRNA-guanine transglycosylase	Enzyme; tRNA modification	tRNA-guanine transglycosylase; queuosine biosynthesis; zinc metalloprotein	Tgt forms a transient covalent linkage with the tRNA substrate. Tgt can recognize a DNA substrate when 2'-deoxyuridines replace thymidines.	b0406
mnmE	thdF, trmE	tRNA U34 5-methylaminomethyl-2-thiouridine modification GTPase	Enzyme; tRNA modification	GTPase required for 5-methylaminomethyl-2-thiouridine modification at tRNA U34	The GTPase activity of MnmE is essential for its modification function. MnmE is required or the cmnm(5) addition to tRNA-s(2)U34, forming (with subsequent or interdependent MnmG action) cmnm(5)s(2)U34-tRNA, an intermediate in mnm(5)s(2)U34-tRNA synthesis. Mutants are hypomodified for s(2)U34 in tRNA(Lys). The carboxymethylaminomethyl donor is unknown. The MnmE-modified base U34 in tRNA is the wobble base. mnmE has proposed to be epistatic to mnmG, preceding it in the pathway (Bregeon, 2001). Yim (2000) suggest that the MnmE and MnmG activities are interdependent, not sequential. MnmG(GidA) and MnmE form a heterotetrameric complex (Yim, 2006).	b3706
thrA	Hs, thrA1, thrA2, thrD	Bifunctional aspartokinase/homoserine dehydrogenase 1	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Threonine	Bifunctional aspartokinase/homoserine dehydrogenase 1; threonine-sensitive	L-serine is a competitive inhibitor of both ThrA activities and L-threonine is an allosteric effector (Wright, 1977; Costrejean, 1977; Broglie, 1983). 	b0002
thrB	None	homoserine kinase	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Threonine	Homoserine kinase	thrB is a multi-copy suppressor of a pdxB deletion (Kim, 2010).	b0003
thrC	None	L-threonine synthase	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Threonine	Threonine synthase	Null	b0004
thrS	None	threonyl-tRNA synthetase	Enzyme; Aminoacyl tRNA synthetases, tRNA modification	Threonine--tRNA ligase, autogenously regulated; binds Zn(II)	30/414 ThrS peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed; 24/414 ThrS peptide masses match the uncleaved ThrS (Maillet, 2007).	b1719
thyA	None	thymidylate synthetase	Enzyme; 2'-Deoxyribonucleotide metabolism	Thymidylate synthase; aminopterin, trimethoprim resistance; homodimer	Thymidylate synthase (TS) catalytic mechanism order: TS + dUMP --> TS x dUMP + (6R)-5,10-CH2-H4folate --> TS x dUMP x (6R)-5,10-CH2H4folate --> TS x dTMP x H2folate --> TS x dTMP --> TS.	b2827
tig	None	peptidyl-prolyl cis/trans isomerase (trigger factor)	Factor; Cell division	Trigger factor, protein folding chaperone; also peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase; interacts with nascent polypeptide chains	dnaK and tig mutants are synthetic lethal at 30 degrees C, however, no lethal effects are observed at 23 degrees C. Overproduction of GroEL/GroES at 30 degrees C suppresses synthetic lethality.	b0436
ptrB	opdB, tlp(S.t.)	protease II	Enzyme; Degradation of proteins, peptides, glyco	Protease II; oligopeptidase B	Cleaves after Arg and Lys.	b1845
tnaA	ind	tryptophanase/L-cysteine desulfhydrase, PLP-dependent	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Amino acids	Tryptophanase, also has cysteine desulfhydrase activity; interconverts tryptophan and indole; also called L-tryptophan indole-lyase	TnaA is required for growth on tryptophan as a carbon source and indole as a tryptophan source. TnaA is a key enzyme in L-cysteine degradation. Alkali-inducible. Downregulated during cold-shock and in early exponential phase. Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004). TnaA binds plasmid colE1 sRNA Rcd, which modulates TnaA activity to regulate growth inhibition by Rcd for plasmid stabilzation (Chant, 2007).	b3708
tnaB	tnaP, trpP	tryptophan transporter of low affinity	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	Tryptophan:H+ symport permease, low affinity	HAAAP family. The AroP (general aromatic) and Mtr (Trp, high affinity) permeases can also transport tryptophan.	b3709
tolA	cim, excC, lky	membrane anchored protein in TolA-TolQ-TolR complex	Membrane; Colicin-related functions	Tolerance to group A colicins, single-stranded filamentous DNA phage; required for OM integrity; membrane protein; bacteriocin tolerant	Cell envelope integrity is stabilized by the Tol-Pal system linking inner and outer membranes. Mutants have elevated OM vesiculation (McBroom, 2006).	b0739
tolB	None	periplasmic protein	Factor; Colicin-related functions	Uptake of group A colicins, mutants are tolerant to colicins E1-3, A, and K	Mutants have elevated OM vesiculation (McBroom, 2006).	b0740
tolC	colE1-i, mtcB, mukA, refI, toc, weeA	transport channel	Putative membrane; Cell division	Outer membrane factor (OMF) of tripartite efflux pumps; channel-tunnel spanning the outer membrane and periplasm; trimeric; ColE1 tolerance	tolC mutants grow poorly on minimal medium and have aberrant cell shapes; a normal phenotype is restored by adding iron; iron-starved tolC cells accumulate periplasmic enterobactin responsible for the growth defect (Vega, 2013). A mutant lacking ygiB, ygiC, yjfM, yjfC, and tolC has an exacerbated growth defect in mimimal medium and has increased antibiotic sensitivities relative to tolC-alone mutants; the phenotypic defects of the five gene deletion strain are complemented by a tolC plasmid; both the ygiBC and yjfMC deletions are needed to exacerbate the tolA phenotype indicating that YgiBC and YjfMC may have redundant functions; it is not known if all four genes need to be deleted to observe the tolC mutant phenotype exacerbations; tolC-ygiBC constitute an operon; the tolC growth defect on minimal medium is caused by inner membrane stress, induces PspA, and is reversible by serine (Dhamdhere, 2010). TolC, MdtQ, MdtP and CusC are paralogs.	b3035
tolQ	fii, tolP	membrane spanning protein in TolA-TolQ-TolR complex	Membrane; Colicin-related functions	Tolerance to group A colicins and ssDNA filamentous phage; cell envelope integrity; inner membrane protein	Null	b0737
tolR	None	membrane spanning protein in TolA-TolQ-TolR complex	Putative transport; Not classified	Colicin import; Tolerance to group A colicins, single-stranded DNA filamentous phage; cell envelope integrity; inner membrane protein;	TolR is anchored to the inner membrane by a single TM segment and extends into the periplasm. TolR is paralogous to ExbD.	b0738
tonB	exbA, T1rec	membrane spanning protein in TonB-ExbB-ExbD transport complex	Membrane; Transport of small molecules: Cations	Uptake of chelated Fe(2+) and cyanocobalamin; works in conjunction with OM receptors; energy transducer; sensitivity to T1, phi80, and colicins; forms a complex with ExbB and ExbD	Periplasmic TonB is attached to the cytoplasmic membrane by a signal anchor and interacts with outer membrane proteins, thus TonB spans the periplasmic space. TonB contains 40 proline residues (17%).	b1252
topA	asuA?, supX	DNA topoisomerase I, omega subunit	Enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	Topoisomerase I; omega protein	Type I topoisomerase TopA relaxes DNA supercoils by nicking.	b1274
topB	mutR	DNA topoisomerase III	Enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	Topoisomerase III; mutR phenotype is decreased deletion formation between short repeats	Null	b1763
tpiA	tpi	triosephosphate isomerase	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Glycolysis	Triosephosphate isomerase	Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004).	b3919
tpr	None	protamine-like protein	Factor; Basic proteins - synthesis, modification	Protamine-like protein, in tyrT primary transcript	Immunoblots of chromosomal SPA-tagged Tpr showed a band the size of the 8 kd SPA tag only, indicating that if tpr is a gene, it is poorly expressed and unstable under the conditions tested (Hemm, 2008). Possibly because of deleterious effects on the neighboring tyrosyl tRNA genes, the tpr mutants in the Keio collection have been shown to harbor an intact copy of tpr in addition to the deletion allele (Yamamoto, 2009).	b1229
treA	osmA	periplasmic trehalase	Enzyme; Osmotic adaptation	Trehalase, periplasmic	Glycoside hydrolase family 37.	b1197
trg	None	methyl-accepting chemotaxis protein III, ribose and galactose sensor receptor	Regulator; Chemotaxis and mobility	Ribose, galactose chemoreceptor, methyl-accepting; MCP III; flagellar regulon	Trg senses ribose and galactose indirectly through their periplasmic binding proteins. Trg is a low-abundance chemoreceptor, 5- 10-fold lower than Tar and Tsr. Trg can function as a warm receptor during thermotaxis. Trg senses low pH as an attractant and phenol as a repellent.	b1421
trkA	sapG(S.t.)	NAD-binding component of TrK potassium transporter	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Cations	Major constitutive K+ uptake permeases TrkAG and TrkAH; high-rate, low-affinity transport; peripheral membrane protein bound to inner membrane protein TrkG or TrkH to form active permease; binds NAD+ and NADH	Although normally required for Trk activity, overproduction of TrkG or TrkH alone increases K+ transport in a trkA mutant strain (Buurman, 2004). TrkA has two complete TrkA(RCK) domains. SapD(TrkE) is required for TrkAH activity and stimulates TrkAG transport rate (Bossemeyer, 1989; Dosch, 1991; Harms, 2001). Trk-mediated transport is driven by proton motive force, but requires a high ATP concentration for maximal activity, presumably because ATP-binding is needed to activate SapD (Harms, 2001). Anaerobically, TrkAH is proposed to form a membrane supercomplex with the F0F1 ATPase and formate-hydrogen lyase (HycB-HycE-FdhF) responsible for hydrogen gas production and 2H+/K+ exchange; thiol groups are required for this activity (Trchounian, 2000). otherPDB(V.parahaemolyticus): 4J9U; 4J9V (Cao, 2013).	b3290
trkG	None	Rac prophage; potassium transporter subunit	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Cations; Phage or Prophage Related	Major constitutive K+ uptake permease TrkAG; high-rate, low-affinity transport; K+-translocating subunit; binds TrkA to inner membrane; Rac prophage	Although normally required for Trk activity, overproduction of TrkG or TrkH alone increases K+ transport in a trkA mutant strain (Buurman, 2004). SapD(TrkE) is required for TrkAH activity and stimulates TrkAG transport rate (Bossemeyer, 1989; Dosch, 1991; Harms, 2001). TrkAG may be inactive during anaerobic growth (Trchounian, 1994). Trk-mediated transport is driven by proton motive force, but requires a high ATP concentration for maximal activity, presumably because ATP-binding is needed to activate SapD (Harms, 2001).	b1363
trkH	sapJ(S.t.)	potassium transporter	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Cations	Major constitutive K+ uptake permease TrkAH; high-rate, low-affinity transport; K+-translocating subunit; binds TrkA to inner membrane	Although normally required for Trk activity, overproduction of TrkG or TrkH alone increases K+ transport in a trkA mutant strain (Buurman, 2004). SapD(TrkE) is required for TrkAH activity and stimulates TrkAG transport rate (Bossemeyer, 1989; Dosch, 1991; Harms, 2001). Trk-mediated transport is driven by proton motive force, but requires a high ATP concentration for maximal activity, presumably because ATP-binding is needed to activate SapD (Harms, 2001). Anaerobically, TrkAH is proposed to form a membrane supercomplex with the F0F1 ATPase and formate-hydrogen lyase (HycB-HycE-FdhF) responsible for hydrogen gas production and 2H+/K+ exchange; thiol groups are required for this activity (Trchounian, 2000). otherPDB (V. parahaemolyticus): 3PJZ (Cao, 2011). otherPDB(V.parahaemolyticus): 4J9U; 4J9V (Cao, 2013).	b3849
trmA	rumT	tRNA m(5)U54 methyltransferase, SAM-dependent; tmRNA m(5)U341 methyltransferase	Enzyme; tRNA modification	tRNA m(5)U54 methyltransferase, SAM-dependent; tmRNA m(5)U341 methyltransferase; RUMT	TrmA(RUMT) is a dual-specificity methyltransferase responsible for m(5)U54 modification in all tRNAs and for m(5)U341 modification in tmRNA (Zamir, 1964; Goodman, 1968; Goodman, 1970; Björk, 1970; Björk, 1975; Ny, 1980; Greenberg, 1980; Sprinzl, 1987; Ny, 1988; Gustafsson, 1991; Feldon, 1998; Ranaei-Siadat, 2013). The modifed ribonucleotide 5-methyluridine, referred to as ribothymidylic acid, was found to be universally present in bulk E. coli tRNA (Zamir, 1965). The position of ribothymidine at position 54 was established when the first E. coli tRNA was sequenced (Goodman, 1968). Ribothymidine was shown to be uridine modified by a methyltransferase using tritiated methionine as the in vivo methyl donor for labeling 5-methyluridine in E. coli tyrosyl tRNA (Goodman, 1970). The trmA mutation was identified, named, mapped and predicted to be the structural gene for tRNA m(5)U methyltransferase (Björk, 1970; Björk, 1975). The trmA gene was cloned and restriction mapped (Ny, 1980). The tRNA m(5)U54 modification is found in all sequenced E. coli tRNAs (Sprinzl, 1985; Sprinzl, 1987). The TrmA enzyme was first purified based upon its tRNA m(5)U54 methyltransferase activity (Greenberg, 1980). TrmA with a high tRNA m(5)U54 methyltransferase specific actvity was purified, characterized, N-terminally sequenced and found to co-purify with a heterogenous RNA fraction (Ny, 1988). The trmA gene and promoter region were sequenced and trmA gene expression was shown to be growth rate regulated at the level of transcription (Gustafsson, 1991). The m(5)U341 modification in tmRNA was identified and TrmA was predicted to be the responsible tmRNA modification enzyme because m(5)U341 is the tmRNA base corresponding to m(5)U54 in tRNAs (Feldon, 1998). A trmA mutant lacks the m(5)U341 modification in tmRNA (Ranaei-Siadat, 2013).	b3965
trmD	None	tRNA m(1)G37 methyltransferase, SAM-dependent	Enzyme; tRNA modification	tRNA m(1)G37 methyltransferase, SAM-dependent	Null	b2607
trpA	try, tryp	tryptophan synthase, alpha subunit	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Tryptophan	Tryptophan synthase, alpha subunit	otherPDB (S. typhimurium): 1BKS.	b1260
trpB	None	tryptophan synthase, beta subunit	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Tryptophan	Tryptophan synthase, beta subunit	otherPDB (S. typhimurium): 1BKS.	b1261
trpC	trpF	indole-3-glycerolphosphate synthetase and N-(5-phosphoribosyl)anthranilate isomerase	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Tryptophan	Tryptophan synthesis, bifunctional: N-(5-phosphoribosyl)anthranilate isomerase and indole-3-glycerolphosphate synthase	The first of two methionine codons is now annotated as the start site since the N-terminal MMQTVLAK TrpC peptide was detected using shotgun proteomics (Krug, 2013). The N-terminal synthase is the TrpC domain and the C-terminal isomerase domain is the TrpF domain.	b1262
trpD	trpGD	fused glutamine amidotransferase (component II) of anthranilate synthase/anthranilate phosphoribosyl transferase	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Tryptophan	Anthranilate synthase component II, bifunctional; glutamine amidotransferase and phosphoribosyl anthranilate transferase; tryptophan biosynthesis	Null	b1263
trpE	anth, tryD, tryp-4	component I of anthranilate synthase	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Tryptophan	Anthranilate synthase component I	Induced during biofilm formation.	b1264
trpR	None	transcriptional repressor, tryptophan-binding	Regulator; Amino acid biosynthesis: Tryptophan	Autogenously regulated tryptophan repressor protein; regulator of trp operon, aroH, and other members of the TrpR regulon; 5-Methyltryptophan resistance	Null	b4393
trpS	None	tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase	Enzyme; Aminoacyl tRNA synthetases, tRNA modification	Tryptophan--tRNA ligase	Null	b3384
trxA	dasC, fip, fipA, tsnC	thioredoxin 1	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Thioredoxin, glutaredoxin, glutathione	Thioredoxin 1; Trx; with TrxB, also has general chaperone activity; processivity factor for phage T7 gene 5 DNA polymerase	Null	b3781
trxB	None	thioredoxin reductase, FAD/NAD(P)-binding	Enzyme; 2'-Deoxyribonucleotide metabolism	Thioredoxin reductase, NADP+, FAD-binding; with TrxA, also has general chaperone activity; dimeric	Null	b0888
tsf	None	translation elongation factor EF-Ts	Factor; Proteins - translation and modification	Translation elongation factor EF-Ts; exchanges GDP for GTP in EF-Tu-GDP complex; binds Zn(II); subunit of RNA phage Q beta replicase	Coliphage Q beta replicase is comprised of the phage-encoded beta subunit and three bacterial proteins: TufB, Tsf and RpsA (Kondo, 1970; Kamen, 1970; Blumenthal, 1972; Wahba, 1974). RpsA is dispensible for RNA synthesis by coliphage Q beta replicase and is not part of the core replicase (Kamen, 1972; Hori, 1974; Landers, 1974). Although TufB and Tsf in the Tomita lab Q beta replicase structures are derived from strain O157:H7, their sequences are identical to the K-12 alleles (Takeshita, 2010; Takeshita, 2012). Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004). HT_Cmplx23_Cyt: FusA+Tsf+TufA. HT_Cmplx4_Cyt: Tsf+TufA.	b0170
tsr	cheD	methyl-accepting chemotaxis protein I, serine sensor receptor	Regulator; Chemotaxis and mobility	Serine chemoreceptor, methyl-accepting; MCP I; also senses repellents; flagellar regulon	Tsr also senses energy levels and is involved in aerotaxis, redox taxis and glycerol repellent taxis. Tsr functions as a warm receptor during thermotaxis.	b4355
tsx	nupA, T6rec	nucleoside channel, receptor of phage T6 and colicin K	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Nucleosides, purines, pyrimidines	Outer membrane channel for nucleosides; receptor for phage T6 and colicin K	The first 22 aa of Tsx are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. The antibiotic albicidin enters via the Tsx channel.	b0411
tufA	kirT, pulT	translation elongation factor EF-Tu 1	Factor; Proteins - translation and modification	Translation elongation factor EF-Tu 1; GTP-dependent binding of aa-tRNA to the A-site of ribosomes; has intrinsic GTPase activity when bound to kirromycin	EF-Tu is the most abundant protein in E. coli comprising 5-10% of total cellular protein, well in excess of translational requirements (Furano, 1975; Jacobson, 1976; Neidhardt, 1977; Miyajima, 1978; Pedersen, 1978; Young, 1981; van der Meide, 1983). The only amino acid difference between TufA and TufB is the last amino acid, G394 in TufA and S394 in TufB. EF-Tu lysines K38, K177, K249, K253, K295 and K314 can be modified to N6-succinyllysine (Zhang, 2011). EF-Tu lysines K177, K188, K209 and K314 can be modified to N6-acetyllysine (Yu, 2008; Zhang, 2009). HipA binds and was reported to phosphorylate EF-Tu residue Thr-383 in vitro (Schumacher, 2009). HipA is not EF-Tu kinase (Germain, 2013). The phage P1 toxin Doc phosphorylates EF-Tu in vitro at Thr383, blocking its ability to bind aminoacylated tRNAs (Castro-Roa, 2013). EF-Tu can be modified at K57 to either N6-monomethyllysine or N6,N6-dimethyllysine; the methyltransferases responsible for these modifications are unknown (L'Italien, 1979; G.F.-L. Ames, 1979). Methylation of EF-Tu at K57 impedes GTP hydrolysis in vitro (Van Noort, 1986). Nutrient starvation promotes the conversion of N6-monomethyllysine to N6,N6-dimethyllysine at K57 in E. coli B EF-Tu (Young, 1990; Young, 1991). tufA encodes an essential function, with duplicate gene tufB, such that tufA or tufB can be deleted, but the double mutant is inviable. Coliphage Q beta replicase is comprised of the phage-encoded beta subunit and three bacterial proteins: TufB, Tsf and RpsA (Kondo, 1970; Kamen, 1970; Blumenthal, 1972; Wahba, 1974). RpsA is dispensible for RNA synthesis by coliphage Q beta replicase and is not part of the core replicase (Kamen, 1972; Hori, 1974; Landers, 1974). 50-80% of EF-Tu can be located at the cytoplasmic membrane, possibly as a result of nutrient stress, and EF-Tu may have a ribosome-independent role since it is present in at least a four-fold molar excess over ribosomes; methylation status of K57 may be related to membrane localization (Jacobson, 1976; Young, 1991). Various mutants and growth conditions have demonstrated that EF-Tu, or a precursor form pTu, can be localized to the outer membrane (Dombou, 1981; Lifson, 1986; Sedgwick, 1986). EF-Tu can form filamentous structures in vitro and has been suggested to be an actin-like cytoskeletal protein (Minkoff, 1975; Minkoff, 1976; Rosenbusch, 1976; Jacobson, 1976; Minkoff, 1977; Beck, 1978; Wurtz, 1978; Beck, 1979; Cremers, 1981; Schilstra, 1986; Helms, 1995; Helms, 1996; Norris, 2007). Although early results indicated a lack of an in vivo EF-Tu cytoskeletal structure in E. coli, subsequent experiments identified a helically organized EF-Tu-containing intracellular protofilament near the inner face of the cytoplasmic membrane with polysomes attached; it was suggested that an EF-Tu-containing cytoskeletal web might be the original prokaryotic cytoskeleton and that MreB evolved later to build upon the EF-Tu cytoplasmic network and be a cell shape determinant (Schilstra, 1984; Mayer, 2003; Mayer, 2006). In B. subtilis, EF-Tu is found in a static helical structure at the inner face of the cytoplasmic membrane co-localized with MreB; MreB and EF-Tu interact in vivo and in vitro; reduction of intracellular EF-Tu affects cell shape but not translation efficiency; EF-Tu intracellular protofilaments may serve as tracks for dynamic MreB shape-determining filaments (Defeu, 2010). HT_Cmplx23_Cyt: FusA+Tsf+TufA.HT_Cmplx4_Cyt: Tsf+TufA.	b3339
tufB	kirT, pulT	translation elongation factor EF-Tu 2	Factor; Proteins - translation and modification	Translation elongation factor EF-Tu 2; GTP-dependent binding of aa-tRNA to the A-site of ribosomes; has intrinsic GTPase activity when bound to kirromycin; subunit of RNA phage Q beta replicase	EF-Tu is the most abundant protein in E. coli comprising 5-10% of total cellular protein, well in excess of translational requirements (Furano, 1975; Jacobson, 1976; Neidhardt, 1977; Miyajima, 1978; Pedersen, 1978; Young, 1981; van der Meide, 1983). The only amino acid difference between TufA and TufB is the last amino acid, G394 in TufA and S394 in TufB. EF-Tu lysines K38, K177, K249, K253, K295 and K314 can be modified to N6-succinyllysine (Zhang, 2011). EF-Tu lysines K177, K188, K209 and K314 can be modified to N6-acetyllysine (Yu, 2008; Zhang, 2009). HipA binds and was reported to phosphorylate EF-Tu residue Thr-383 in vitro (Schumacher, 2009). HipA is not EF-Tu kinase (Germain, 2013). The phage P1 toxin Doc phosphorylates EF-Tu in vitro at Thr383, blocking its ability to bind aminoacylated tRNAs (Castro-Roa, 2013). EF-Tu can be modified at K57 to either N6-monomethyllysine or N6,N6-dimethyllysine; the methyltransferases responsible for these modifications are unknown (L'Italien, 1979; G.F.-L. Ames, 1979). Methylation of EF-Tu at K57 impedes GTP hydrolysis in vitro (Van Noort, 1986). Nutrient starvation promotes the conversion of N6-monomethyllysine to N6,N6-dimethyllysine at K57 in E. coli B EF-Tu (Young, 1990; Young, 1991). tufA encodes an essential function, with duplicate gene tufB, such that tufA or tufB can be deleted, but the double mutant is inviable. Coliphage Q beta replicase is comprised of the phage-encoded beta subunit and three bacterial proteins: TufB, Tsf and RpsA (Kondo, 1970; Kamen, 1970; Blumenthal, 1972; Wahba, 1974). RpsA is dispensible for RNA synthesis by coliphage Q beta replicase and is not part of the core replicase (Kamen, 1972; Hori, 1974; Landers, 1974). 50-80% of EF-Tu can be located at the cytoplasmic membrane, possibly as a result of nutrient stress, and EF-Tu may have a ribosome-independent role since it is present in at least a four-fold molar excess over ribosomes; methylation status of K57 may be related to membrane localization (Jacobson, 1976; Young, 1991). Various mutants and growth conditions have demonstrated that EF-Tu, or a precursor form pTu, can be localized to the outer membrane (Dombou, 1981; Lifson, 1986; Sedgwick, 1986). EF-Tu can form filamentous structures in vitro and has been suggested to be an actin-like cytoskeletal protein (Minkoff, 1975; Minkoff, 1976; Rosenbusch, 1976; Jacobson, 1976; Minkoff, 1977; Beck, 1978; Wurtz, 1978; Beck, 1979; Cremers, 1981; Schilstra, 1986; Helms, 1995; Helms, 1996; Norris, 2007). Although early results indicated a lack of an in vivo EF-Tu cytoskeletal structure in E. coli, subsequent experiments identified a helically organized EF-Tu-containing intracellular protofilament near the inner face of the cytoplasmic membrane with polysomes attached; it was suggested that an EF-Tu-containing cytoskeletal web might be the original prokaryotic cytoskeleton and that MreB evolved later to build upon the EF-Tu cytoplasmic network and be a cell shape determinant (Schilstra, 1984; Mayer, 2003; Mayer, 2006). In B. subtilis, EF-Tu is found in a static helical structure at the inner face of the cytoplasmic membrane co-localized with MreB; MreB and EF-Tu interact in vivo and in vitro; reduction of intracellular EF-Tu affects cell shape but not translation efficiency; EF-Tu intracellular protofilaments may serve as tracks for dynamic MreB shape-determining filaments (Defeu, 2010).	b3980
tus	tau	inhibitor of replication at Ter, DNA-binding protein	Factor; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	DNA contrahelicase, terminus utilization substance	Site-specific DNA binding protein Tus arrests the DnaB helicase at six chromosomal Ter sites (A-F), blocking replication forks.	b1610
tyrA	None	fused chorismate mutase T/prephenate dehydrogenase	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Tyrosine	Tyrosine synthesis: chorismate mutase/prephenate dehydrogenase	Bifunctional protein, mutase is N-terminal domain. TyrR regulon. tyrA is in the PurR regulon (Marbach, 2012). N-terminal protein sequencing identified a faint band of uncleaved precursor, indicating that some TyrA protein is not processed (Hudson, 1984). 2/904 TyrA peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed; 1/904 peptide masses indicate that occasionally the initial Met is not removed (Maillet, 2007).	b2600
tyrB	None	tyrosine aminotransferase, tyrosine-repressible, PLP-dependent	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Tyrosine	Tyrosine aminotransferase; aromatic amino acid aminotransferase; phenylalanine aminotransferase; dicarboxylic amino acid aminotransferase; homodimeric	tyrB is in the TyrR regulon.	b4054
tyrP	None	tyrosine transporter	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	Tyrosine:H+ symport permease	HAAAP family. TyrR regulon.	b1907
tyrR	None	aromatic amino acid biosynthesis and transport regulon transcriptional regulator; autorepressor; ATPase; phosphatase	Regulator; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	TyrR regulon repressor or activator; regulates aroF, aroG, tyrA, and aromatic amino acid transport; autoregulation of tyrR not mediated by tyrosine; ATPase activity; zinc-stimulated phosphatase activity	Null	b1323
tyrS	None	tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase	Enzyme; Aminoacyl tRNA synthetases, tRNA modification	Tyrosine--tRNA ligase	Null	b1637
ubiX	dedF	3-octaprenyl-4-hydroxybenzoate carboxy-lyase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	3-octaprenyl-4-hydroxybenzoate carboxylyase; UbiD isozyme	A small 56 codon non-translated ORF overlapping the end of ubiX is erroneously annotated as a CDS feature encoding protein in various E. coli genomes, e.g. the 47 aa c2854 CDS in strain CFT073.	b2311
udp	None	uridine phosphorylase	Enzyme; Salvage of nucleosides and nucleotides	Uridine phosphorylase	Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004).	b3831
ugpA	psiB, psiC	sn-glycerol-3-phosphate ABC transporter permease	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	sn-Glycerol-3-phosphate ABC transporter permease	Pho regulon.	b3452
ugpB	psiB, psiC	sn-glycerol-3-phosphate ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	sn-Glycerol-3-phosphate ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein	Pho regulon.	b3453
ugpC	None	sn-glycerol-3-phosphate ABC transporter ATPase	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	sn-Glycerol-3-phosphate ABC transporter ATPase	Pho regulon.	b3450
ugpE	None	sn-glycerol-3-phosphate  ABC transporter permease	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	sn-Glycerol-3-phosphate ABC transporter permease	Pho regulon.	b3451
ugpQ	None	glycerophosphodiester phosphodiesterase, cytosolic	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	Glycerophosphodiester phosphodiesterase; cytosolic	Pho regulon. 5/36 UgpQ peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed (Maillet, 2007).	b3449
uhpA	None	response regulator in two-component regulatory system wtih UhpB	Regulator; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	Response regulator of two component system required for uhpT transcription	Null	b3669
uhpB	None	sensory histidine kinase in two-component regulatory sytem with UhpA	Enzyme; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	Membrane sensor kinase protein controlling UhpA activity	Probable false positive lipoprotein prediction, Cys not conserved, 10 CM TMs predicted.	b3668
uhpC	None	membrane protein regulates uhpT expression	Regulator; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	Glc6P transporter; membrane sensor recognizing external glucose-6-phosphate (Glc6P) and, in concert with UhpB, inducing uhpT	UhpC transporter activity is not required for sensing. Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS).	b3667
uhpT	None	hexose phosphate transporter	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	Hexose phosphate permease; fosfomycin sensitivity; monomeric	UhpT exhanges cytoplasmic phosphate for hexose phosphate. UhpT also catalyzes the neutral exchange of internal and external Pi. UhpT has 12 TM regions. Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS).	b3666
uidA	gurA, gusA	beta-D-glucuronidase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Beta-d-glucuronidase	UidA has an Ig-like domain: pfam PF00703 aligns to residues 182-272. ebgA, uidA and lacZ are paralogs.	b1617
umuC	uvm	translesion error-prone DNA polymerase V subunit; DNA polymerase activity	Putative enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	Translesion DNA polymerase V subunit, DNA polymerizing subunit; error-prone repair; induced mutagenesis protein; DNA damage checkpoint effector; intrinsic AP lyase activity	Error-prone translesion DNA polymerase V is UmuD'(2)C that can bypass DNA lesions blocking DNA pol III (Tang, 1999; Reuven, 1999; Tang, 2000; Maor-Shoshani, 2000). UmuC has weak DNA polymerase activity that is greatly stimulated by UmuD' and RecA (Reuven, 1999). Uncleaved UmuD(2)C is a DNA damage checkpoint effector that can delay replication restart until it is converted into Pol V (Opperman, 1999; Murli, 2000; Ferentz, 2001). Pol V has intrinsic AP lyase activity (Chen, 2005). Pol V is a RecA-ssDNA binding protein (Frank, 1993). The RecA-ssDNA complex, a nucleoprotein filament, is required for PolV translesion bypass synthesis (Reuven, 2001). The active form of PolV is UmuD'(2)C-RecA-ATP (Jiang, 2009). Because Pol V (UmuD'(2)C) is mutagenic it is regulated by UmuD autocleavage activation to UmuD' and by Lon and ClpXP-mediated regulated degradation of UmuC, UmuD, and UmuD'; UmuD' is targeted for ClpXP-mediated degradation by the UmuD protein in the UmuDD' dimer, leaving UmuD intact; UmuD and UmuC are degraded by Lon (Frank, 1996; Gonzalez, 1998; Gonzalez, 2000). LexA regulon.	b1184
umuD	None	translesion error-prone DNA polymerase V subunit; RecA-activated auto-protease	Putative enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	Translesion DNA polymerase V subunit; error-prone repair; intrinsic AP lyase activity; induced mutagenesis protein; DNA damage checkpoint effector; RecA-activated auto-protease	Error-prone translesion DNA polymerase V is UmuD'(2)C that can bypass DNA lesions blocking DNA pol III (Tang, 1999; Reuven, 1999; Tang, 2000; Maor-Shoshani, 2000). Uncleaved UmuD(2)C is a DNA damage checkpoint effector that can delay replication restart until it is converted into Pol V (Opperman, 1999; Murli, 2000; Ferentz, 2001). Pol V has intrinsic AP lyase activity (Chen, 2005). Trans-autocleavage of an UmuD homodimer subunit by the other UmuD subunit, triggered by the UmuD dimer binding to a ssDNA-RecA complex, removes the first 24 amino acids to form UmuD' which is required for mutageneic translesion synthesis (TLS) (Shinagawa, 1988; Nohmi, 1988; Burckhardt, 1988; Shiba, 1990; Woodgate, 1991; Bailone, 1991; Lee, 1996; McDonald, 1998; Opperman, 1999; Sutton, 2001). UmuD and UmuD' are intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) that can nonetheless form stable dimers (Simon, 2008). Pol V is a RecA-ssDNA binding protein (Frank, 1993). The RecA-ssDNA complex, a nucleoprotein filament, is required for PolV translesion bypass synthesis (Reuven, 2001). The active form of PolV is UmuD'(2)C-RecA-ATP (Jiang, 2009). Because Pol V (UmuD'(2)C) is mutagenic it is regulated by UmuD autocleavage activation to UmuD' and by Lon and ClpXP-mediated regulated degradation of UmuC, UmuD, and UmuD'; UmuD' is targeted for ClpXP-mediated degradation by the UmuD protein in the UmuDD' dimer, leaving UmuD intact; UmuD and UmuC are degraded by Lon (Frank, 1996; Gonzalez, 1998; Gonzalez, 2000). LexA regulon.	b1183
ung	None	uracil-DNA-glycosylase	Enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	Uracil-DNA glycosylase; UDG excises uracil from DNA by base flipping mechanism; prefers ssDNA over dsDNA	UDG and Ndk form a complex (Goswami, 2006). UDG binds SSB C-terminus. CpxRA negatively regulates ung.	b2580
usg	None	putative semialdehyde dehydrogenase	Putative transport; Not classified	Aspartate-semialdehyde dehydrogenase paralog, function unknown	HT_Cmplx38_Cyt: Usg+YbbN. HT_Cmplx50_Mem: Pgk+Usg.	b2319
ushA	None	bifunctional UDP-sugar hydrolase/5'-nucleotidase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Sugar-nucleotide biosynthesis, conversions	UDP-glucose hydrolase, 5'-nucleotidase, CDP-alcohol hydrolase; also has dinucleoside-polyphosphate hydrolase activity; periplasmic and exported enzyme; monomeric	UshA has highly efficient CDP-alcohol hydrolase activity (Alves-Pereira, 2008). 	b0480
uvrA	dar	ATPase and DNA damage recognition protein of nucleotide excision repair excinuclease UvrABC	Enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	Excision nuclease subunit A; nucleotide excision repair of UV damage to DNA; LexA regulon; binds Zn(II)	Null	b4058
uvrB	dar-1, dar-6	exision nuclease of nucleotide excision repair, DNA damage recognition component	Enzyme; Degradation of DNA	Excision nuclease subunit B, ATPase I and helicase II; repair of UV damage to DNA	Null	b0779
uvrC	None	excinuclease UvrABC, endonuclease subunit	Enzyme; Degradation of DNA	Excision nuclease subunit C; repair of UV damage to DNA; multicopy causes mucoidy	Null	b1913
uvrD	dar-2, dda, mutU, pdeB, rad, recL, srjC, uvr502, uvrE	DNA-dependent ATPase I and helicase II	Enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	ATP-dependent 3'-5' DNA helicase II; unwinds forked DNA structures; dismantles the RecA nucleoprotein filament; increased rates of spontaneous mutagenesis; dimer	UvrD acts as a dimer in vivo (Maluf, 2003).	b3813
uxaB	None	altronate oxidoreductase, NAD-dependent	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	D-altronate oxidoreductase, NAD-dependent; galacturonate branch of hexuronate pathway	ExuR regulon. MtlD, UxaB, UxuB, YdfI and YeiQ are all COG0246/PF01232 members encoding mannitol/altrunate-related sugar oxidoreductases.	b1521
uxuA	None	mannonate hydrolase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	D-mannonate dehydratase (hydrolase); Fe(2)-requiring; glucuronate branch of hexuronate pathway	UxuR regulon.	b4322
valS	val-act	valyl-tRNA synthetase	Enzyme; Aminoacyl tRNA synthetases, tRNA modification	Valine--tRNA ligase	Null	b4258
vsr	None	DNA mismatch endonuclease of very short patch repair	Enzyme; Degradation of DNA	Mismatch nicking endonuclease, helps repair TG mismatches	Mismatch repair minimizes the effects of C methylation.	b1960
xerC	None	site-specific tyrosine recombinase	Enzyme; Cell division	Tyrosine recombinase XerCD, resolves chromosome dimers; site-specific	XerCD acts at the Dif site.	b3811
dsbC	xprA	protein disulfide isomerase II	Enzyme; Surface structures	Disulfide bond isomerase, periplasmic; chaperone; activated by DsbD; homodimeric	DsbC rearranges incorrect disulfide bonds during oxidative protein folding.	b2893
xerD	xprB	site-specific tyrosine recombinase	Enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	Tyrosine recombinase XerCD, resolves chromosome dimers; site-specific	XerCD acts at the Dif site.	b2894
xseA	xse	exonuclease VII, large subunit	Enzyme; Degradation of DNA	Exonuclease VII, large subunit	Null	b2509
xthA	xth	exonuclease III	Enzyme; Degradation of DNA	Exodeoxyribonuclease III and AP endodeoxyribonuclease VI; RNase H activity; DNA repair	Null	b1749
xylA	None	D-xylose isomerase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	D-xylose isomerase	Null	b3565
xylB	None	xylulokinase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	D-xylulose kinase	Null	b3564
xylE	None	D-xylose transporter	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	Xylose/H+ symporter	Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS). 	b4031
nhaR	antO, yaaB	transcriptional activator of nhaA	Regulator; Transport of small molecules: Cations	Positive regulator of nhaA, Na(+)-dependent	nhaR lacks an obvious promoter and may be expressed via nhaA readthrough. LysR family.	b0020
ribF	yaaC	bifunctional riboflavin kinase/FAD synthetase	Putative regulator; Not classified	Riboflavin kinase and FAD synthase	RibF is a bifunctional enzyme: the riboflavin kinase is the N-terminal domain; the FAD synthase is the C-terminal domain. RibF is homologous to and can substitute for the essential B. subtilis RibC. RibF is also known as protein X. The biochemical characterization of RibF described in Kitatsuji, K., S. Ishino, S. Teshiba, and M. Arimoto, 1993, Process for producing flavine nucleotides, European patent application: 0 542 240 A2. Although ribF is classified as an essential gene because a kan cassette replacement deletion could not be recombineered as part of the Keio collection, using pKO-mediated knockout technology a deletion was reportedly obtained (Arigoni, 1998). Perhaps a Keio collection kan replacement mutation could not be constructed in ribF due to polarity on the downstream essential genes ileS and lsp.	b0025
fkpB	slpA, yaaD	FKBP-type peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase (rotamase)	Putative enzyme; Proteins - translation and modification	FKBP-type peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase	Null	b0028
ispH	lytB, yaaE	4-hydroxy-3-methylbut-2-enyl diphosphate reductase, 4Fe-4S protein	Null	4-hydroxy-3-methylbut-2-enyl diphosphate reductase; last, branched, step of isopentenyl diphosphate (IPP) and dimethylallyl diphosphate (DMAPP) synthesis from 1-hydroxy-2-methyl-2-(E)-butenyl 4-diphosphate; alternative nonmevalonate (DXP) pathway for terp	The ispH gene is essential. IspH contains a [4Fe-4S] cluster. IspH affects penicillin tolerance and the stringent response. 2/42 IspH(LytB) peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is not removed (Maillet, 2007).	b0029
rihC	yaaF	ribonucleoside hydrolase 3	Null	Ribonucleoside hydrolase	Purified homodimeric RihC has the highest activity with substrates uridine, xanthosine, and inosine (Arivett, 2014).	b0030
rapA	hepA, yabA	RNA polymerase remodeling/recycling factor ATPase; RNA polymerase-associated, ATP-dependent RNA translocase	Putative enzyme; RNA synthesis, modification, DNA transcription	RNA polymerase-associated, ATP-dependent RNA translocase; RNA polymerase PTC complex remodeling/recycling factor ATPase	RapA stimulates RNAP recycling and PcnB-dependent RNA polyadenylation with an ATPase-dependent RNA remodeling and release from post-termination immobilized ternary RNAP-DNA-RNA complexes (PTCs) (Sukhodolets, 2001; McKinley, 2007; Shaw, 2008; Yawn, 2009; Richmond, 2011; Jin, 2011). RapA(HepA) has sequence similarity to SWI2/SNF2 helicases and binds nucleic acids, but RapA does not display RNA or DNA helicase activity in vitro (Sukhodolets, 1998). RapA has RNAP-dependent ATPase activity (Sukhodolets, 2000). rapA is downstream of polB, but is not under lexA control. The mutant phentypes may be indirect since other genes, e.g. yeeZ and aaeA(yhcQ), are downregulated in rapA(hepA) mutants (Lynch, 2007). rapA(hepA) mutant biofilms have less polysaccharide and are antibiotic sensitive (Lynch, 2007). rapA(hepA) mutants are UV sensitive.	b0059
mraZ	yabB	RsmH methytransferase inhibitor	Null	DNA-binding transcriptional repressor	MraZ is a transcriptional repressor for the mraZ promoter of the dcw gene cluster and and RNA-Seq indicates regulation of 100 genes by MraZ, including mioC for which operator binding was confirmed (Eraso, 2014).	b0081
rsmH	mraW, yabC	16S rRNA m(4)C1402 methyltransferase, SAM-dependent	Enzyme; rRNA modification	16S rRNA m(4)C1402 methyltransferase, SAM-dependent; membrane-associated. expressed gene in dcw gene cluster; non-essential	RsmH and RsmI are responsible for the N(4), 2'-O-dimethylcytidine (m(4)Cm) modifications at position 1402 of the Escherichia coli 16S rRNA (Kimura, 2009). RsmH(MraW) was reported to also methylate membrane proteins (Carrion, 1999). At least four groups have deleted rsmH(mraW,yabC): Carrion(1999) found it to be essential for growth; Arigoni(1998) found a reduced growth rate; Dassain(1999) and Merlin(2002) found that the deletion strain grew normally. A possible explanation is that the Carrion et al. mutation might be polar on a downstream essential gene. But this defect would have to be suppressible by RsmH(MraW) overexpression. Carrion(1999) found some protein starting with the second Met which might represent an alternative initiation site. Limiting MAP, when RsmH(MraW) is overproduced, is probably not the explanation since MM- is not a MAP substrate.	b0082
ftsL	mraR, yabD	membrane bound cell division leucine zipper septum protein	Phenotype; Cell division	Cell division and growth, membrane protein	The ftsL gene is essential. FtsL forms a complex with FtsB prior to mid-cell localization; this complex formation requires FtsQ, but not FtsK. Divisome.	b0083
secM	srrA, yacA	regulator of secA translation	Null	Secretion monitor controlling secA expression	Translation and secretion of SecM regulates downstream secA gene expression. The first 37 aa of SecM are predicted to be a signal peptide. The arrest sequence is 150-FXXXXWIXXXXGIRAGP-166. The arrested peptide ends with G165: P-166 encodes an arrest requirement for free Pro166-tRNA in the ribosomal peptidyl transferase A site (Muto 2006).	b0097
pdhR	aceC, genA, yacB	pyruvate dehydrogenase complex repressor; autorepressor	Regulator; Energy metabolism, carbon: Pyruvate dehydrogenase	Pyruvate dehydrogenase operon (pdhR-aceEF-lpd) repressor; autoregulatory; pyruvate relieves repression; monomeric	The N-terminus of overexpressed PdhR has been determined (Quail and Guest, 1995), indicating that the initial Met is removed. however, the native pdhR RBS was not used, so PdhR is not in the Verified Set, although this is probably the correct start. PdhR is a GntR-type DNA-binding transcriptional regulator.	b0113
yacC	gspS	PulS_OutS family protein	Null	Expressed protein, function unknown, PulS_OutS family	YacC is expressed as part of the speDE operon. The first 22 aa of YacC are predicted to be a Type I signal peptide.	b0122
mtn	mtnN, pfs, yadA	5'-methylthioadenosine/S-adenosylhomocysteine nucleosidase	Null	5'-Methylthioadenosine nucleosidase; S-adenosylhomocysteine and 5'-deoxyadenosine are also substrates	Mutants accumulate 5'-deoxyadenosine and have impaired biotin synthase activity. Required for AI-2 autoinducer synthesis in Salmonella and P. gingivalis.	b0159
frsA	yafA	fermentation-respiration switch protein; PTS Enzyme IIA(Glc)-binding protein; pNP-butyrate esterase activity	Null	Fermentation-respiration switch protein; PTS Enzyme IIAGlc-binding protein, binds unphosphorylated form; has pNP-butyrate esterase activity in vitro	An frsA mutant has increased cellular respiration on glucose; FrsA overexpression has increased fermentation rate on glucose. The FrsA N-terminus has been verified by MS, fMet is clipped (Koo, 2004). 8/228 FrsA(YafA) peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed (Maillet, 2007). FrsA peptide masses from MS/MS analysis indicate this is the correct start site and that the initial Met is removed (Guo, 2014).	b0239
crl'	None	pseudogene, sigma factor-binding protein, RNA polymerase holoenzyme formation stimulator	Regulator; Surface structures	Pseudogene, sigma factor-binding protein; stimulates RNAP holoenzyme formation; stimulates RpoS activity during stationary phase; mutants display rpoS mutant phenocopy; mutant does not have reduced amount of RpoS protein	RpoD, RpoS and RpoH sigma factor-containing holoenzyme assembly is stimulated by Crl (Gaal, 2006). Accumulation of Crl during stationary phase at 30C, but not 37C, suggests it is a thermosensor controlling sigma(S) activity. Initially identified due to reduction of RpoS-dependent curlin (csgAB) expression. The crl IS1I insertion after codon 33 creating a pseudogene in MG1655(Seq) (ATCC 700926; CGSC 7740) is a lab mutation acquired during the genome sequencing process; the parental MG1655 strain (ATCC 47076; CGSC 6300) has an intact crl gene (Freddolino, 2012).	b0240
yaiA	None	OxyR-regulated conserved protein	Null	OxyR-regulated protein	Although there are no Pfam hits for YaiA there are homologs in closely related bacteria.	b0389
sbcD	yajA	exonuclease, dsDNA, ATP-dependent	Enzyme; Degradation of DNA	DNA hairpin dsDNA 3'-exonuclease SbcCD, Mn(2+), ATP-dependent; ATP-independent 5' ssDNA endonuclease; cosuppressor with sbcB of recB recC mutations; heterodimeric	SbcCD can cleave dsDNA 5' ends sealed by a hairpin or by covalent linkage to a protein. SbcCD limits recombination between short inverted repeats, but is also reported to be required for palindrome-stimulated deletion. SbcCD protein forms a large 1.2 megadalton complex.	b0398
acpH	acpD, yajB	acyl carrier protein (ACP) phosphodiesterase; ACP hydrolyase	Enzyme; Not classified	Acyl carrier protein (ACP) phosphodiesterase; ACP hydrolyase	AcpH is required for turnover of the acyl carrier protein (ACP) prosthetic group 4'-phosphopanthetheine at Ser36 in vivo. Structural modeling and site-directed mutagenesis experiments indicate that the AcpH/DUF479/COG3124 family are members of the HD superfamily of metal-dependent phosphohydrolases, although lacking a usually conserved His residue (Thomas, 2006).	b0404
yajC	None	SecYEG protein translocase auxillary subunit	Null	SecDFyajC membrane secretion complex subunit; assists the SecYE translocon to interact with SecA and export proteins	YajC is found in the heterotrimeric complex SecDFYajC and in the heterotetrameric complex secDFYajC-YidC which can bind to SecYEG, and is also found as an abundant ~56 kDa homoligomeric complex (Nouwen, 2002; Stenberg, 2005).	b0407
yajD	None	HNH nuclease family protein	Null	HNH nuclease family protein	Null	b0410
xseB	yajE	exonuclease VII small subunit	Enzyme; Degradation of DNA	Exonuclease VII, small subunit	The XseA start site has been confirmed by N-terminal protein sequencing and the initial Met is removed: Diaz, DL, Williams, KR, and Chase, JW, (1995) personal commnication cited in SwissProt P0A8G9.	b0422
ybaA	None	DUF1428 family protein	Null	DUF1428 family protein	Null	b0456
ybaB	efbC(B.b)	DNA-binding protein, putative nucleoid-associated protein	Factor; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	DNA-binding protein, probable nucleoid-associated protein; cloned membrane protein overexpression enhancer; homodimer	E. coli YbaB is a DNA-binding protein (Cooley, 2009). B. burgdorferi YbaB is a novel nucleoid-binding protein and global regulator of gene expression that can bend DNA and is highly expressed in rapidly growing cells but is not expressed in stationary phase (Jutras, 2012). YbaB co-expression increases the overproduction of cloned membrane proteins, especially human GPCRs (Skretas, 2010). YbaB is in the RpoE regulon (Rezuchova, 2003). YbaB can be modified by lysine acetylation in vitro using purified E. coli Pka(YfiQ) (Thao, 2010). otherPDB (H. influenzae): 1J8B.	b0471
aes	ybaC	acetyl esterase	Orf; Not classified	Short acyl chain and triacetyl glycerol esterase; affects maltose gene expression	S9 peptidase family.	b0476
gsk	None	inosine/guanosine kinase	Enzyme; Salvage of nucleosides and nucleotides	Inosine-guanosine kinase	Null	b0477
sfmZ	fimZ(S.t.), ybcA	response regulator family protein	Putative regulator; Surface structures	Orphan two-component system response regulator protein; predicted DNA-binding transcriptional regulator; putative sfm operon positive regulator	Salmonella FimZ is a positve regulator of Salmonella fim operon expression (Yeh, 1995). The sfmACDHF-sfmZ genes in centisome 12 are a remnant of a region that is orthologous to the Salmonella enterica fimA[I]CDHF-fim[WY]Z convergent operons also in centisome 12; both are adjacent to the argU tRNA gene; an ancestral sfmWYZ operon was apparently disrupted by the insertion of the DLP prophage, resulting in the loss of the sfmWY genes; fimI (like E. coli fimI) and STM05551 (between fimW and fimY) are specific to Salmonella. The cognate sensor histidine kinase for SfmZ(FimZ) and the orphan response regulator FimZ in Salmonella is unknown, but evidence suggests it should exist elsewhere where on the Salmonella chromosome, and by analogy also SfmZ might have a cognate sensor elsewhere; both fimY and fimZ are needed for fim expression in Salmonella; FimW is a FimZ-interacting proteni that does not bind DNA although it appears to be distantly related to the DNA-binding response regulators (Zeiner, 2013). SfmZ(FimZ) has an N-terminal response regulator receiver domain (PF00072) and a C-terminal LuxR-type DNA-binding HTH transcriptional regulator output domain (PF00196).	b0535
entS	ybdA	enterobactin exporter, iron-regulated	Putative transport; Not classified	Enterobactin exporter, iron-regulated	EntS(YbdA) overexpression reduces intracellular arabinose, but not xylose, concentration; other compounds were not tested (Koita, 2012). Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS). Mutations in entS have a hyperlethality phenotype when cells are stressed; EntS is a protein that reduces the lethal effects of stress (Han, 2010). In addition to its role in iron acquisition, enterobactin plays a role in oxidative stress protection and is required to form colonies on M9 minimal media aerobically (Adler, 2014).	b0591
entH	ybdB	enterobactin synthesis proofreading thioesterase	Null	Enterobactin synthesis proofreading thioesterase	EntH corrects misacylation of the aryl carrier protein domain of EntB (Guo, 2009; Chen, 2009). EntH is a member of the HotDog superfamily of thioesterases and dehydratases (Pfam CL0050, PF03061; PDB 1VH9) (Dillon, 2004; Badger, 2005). EntH has acyl-CoA esterase activity in vitro (Kuznetsova, 2005). EntH has low level DHNA-CoA thioesterase activity but entH still mutants synthesize enterobactin (Chen, 2013). In addition to its role in iron acquisition, enterobactin plays a role in oxidative stress protection and is required to form colonies on M9 minimal media aerobically (Adler, 2014).	b0597
ybdD	None	DUF466 family protein	Null	DUF466 family protein	Paralogs cstA and yjiY are both in operons with paralogous small proteins of unknown function, ybdD and yjiX, respectively.	b4512
ybgA	tkp	DUF1722 family protein	Null	DUF1722 family protein	Null	b0707
mngR	farR, ybgB	transcriptional repressor for the mannosyl-D-glycerate catabolic operon	Regulator; Energy metabolism, carbon: TCA cycle	mngAB operon repressor, mannosyl-D-glycerate utilization	MngR was originally identifed as the fatty acyl-responsive regulator FarR based on in vitro experiments; this conclusion is now in doubt based on microarray experiments (Sampaio, 2004).	b0730
ybgC	None	acyl-CoA thioester hydrolase	Enzyme; Fatty acid and phosphatidic acid biosynthesis	Acyl-CoA thioesterase; possibly involved in phospholipid metabolism; binds ACP; acyl-ACP could be native substrate	YbgC-ACP forms an inner membrane complex with PssA and PlsB and is therefore presumed to be involved in phospholipid biosynthesis, possibly in the release of lipids from ACP or in the regulation of the stability or activity of the phospholipid synthetic enzymes PssA and PlsB, however a ybgC mutant did not exhibit qualitative differences in phospholipid composition (Gully, 2006). A ybgC insertion mutation has no obvious phenotype and is not polar on tolQ (Sun, 1987). It was suggested that YbgC might be DHNA-CoA thioesterase since the YbgC homolog Slr0204 of Synechocystis catalyzes DHNA-CoA hydrolysis, but it was subsequently shown that YbgC has no DHNA-CoA thioesterase activity and the real DHNA-CoA thioesterase is MenI(YdiI) (Jiang, 2010; Chen, 2013). ybgC is the first gene in the ybgC-tolQRA operon (Vianney, 1996; Muller, 1997). YbgC is not part of the Tol-Pal complex. YbgC is a low abundance protein (Fountoulakis, 1999). YbgC is a member of the hotdog superfamily of thioesterases and dehydratases (Pfam CL0050, PF03061; PDB 1S5U) (Dillon, 2004; Kim Y., Joachimiak A., Skarina T., Savchenko A., Edwards A., unpublished).	b0736
cspD	cspH, ybjA	inhibitor of DNA replication, cold shock protein homolog	Phenotype; Not classified	Inhibitor of DNA replication; cold shock protein homolog, not cold shock inducible; stationary phase and starvation inducible; lethal when overproduced; persistance gene	The toxic protein CspD is regulated by the toxin-antitoxin pair MqsRA and affects the formation of persister cells (Kim, 2010).	b0880
aat	ycaA	leucyl/phenylalanyl-tRNA-protein transferase	Enzyme; Aminoacyl tRNA synthetases, tRNA modification	Leucyl, phenylalanyl-tRNA-protein transferase; L/F-transferase; transfers Leu or Phe to N-terminal Arg or Lys residues; required for the N-end rule degradation by ClpAP protease	Null	b0885
yccA	None	Modulator of FtsH protease, inner membrane protein	Putative transport; Not classified	Modulator of FtsH protease, inner membrane protein; mutant YccA stabilizes SecY(Ts), suppression requires HflKC; BAX Inhibitor-1 family protein	YccA is a native substrate for the FtsH(HflB) protease and modulates its activity for other substrates (Kihara, 1998; van Stelten, 2009). The BAX Inhibitor-1 (BI-1) family (previously called the TEGT or UPF0005 family) proteins are widely conserved; BI-1 has an anti-apoptotic function and forms a Ca(2+)-permeable channel; E. coli has three BI-1 family proteins: YccA, YbhM and YbhL (Hückelhoven, 2004; Bultynck, 2011).	b0970
cbdX	appX, yccB	putative cytochrome bd-II oxidase subunit	Null	Probable subunit of cytochrome bd-II oxidase	CbdX(AppX,YccB) is a probable subunit of the cytochrome bd-II oxidase CbdAB(AppCB); CydX(YbgT) binds to CydAB and is required for full cytochrome bd-1 activity in cells; overproduced CbdX can substitute for CydX in vivo (Vanorsdel; 2013). cbdX(appX) and cydX(ybgT) are homologs.	b4592
yceA	None	putative rhodanese-related sulfurtransferase	Null	Putative rhodanese	glpE, yceA and yibN are paralogs.	b1055
yceB	None	lipoprotein, DUF1439 family	Null	DUF1439 family verified lipoprotein	First 18 aa are a type II signal peptide.	b1063
rluC	yceC	23S rRNA pseudouridine(955,2504,2580) synthase	Enzyme; rRNA modification	23S rRNA pseudouridine(955,2504,2580) synthase	 RluC is a ribosome-associated protein (Jiang, 2007).	b1086
yceD	None	DUF177 family protein	Null	DUF177 family protein	One of the yceD mRNA starts is leaderless but can bind ribosomes (Tanaka, 1989; Brock, 2010).	b1088
tfaE	ycfA	e14 prophage; putative tail fiber assembly protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Predicted tail fiber assembly gene, e14 prophage	tfaE is expectd to be transcriptionally silenced in the P-element P(+) orientation (as shown) and non-functional also because its cognate stfE' gene is truncated in the P(-) orientation (Plasterk, 1984; Mehta, 2004).	b1156
yciA	None	acyl-CoA esterase	Null	Acyl-CoA esterase	YciA is a member of the HotDog superfamily of thioesterases and dehydratases (Pfam CL0050, PF03061) (Dillon, 2004). YciA peptide masses from MS/MS analysis indicate this is the correct start site and that the initial Met is removed (Guo, 2014).	b1253
yciB	ispA(S.f.), ispZ	IspA family inner membrane protein	Null	IspA family inner membrane protein; biofilm-related protein; reduced OM production	An outcrossed yciB deletion from the Keio collection conferred reduced biofilm formation; a yciB mutant has reduced levels of outer membrane proteins OmpA, OmpC, OmpF, and LamB; a yciB rodZ(yfgA) double mutant could not be constructed indicating that this is a synthetically lethal combination (Niba, 2007). A yciB ortholog is involved in intracellular septation in Shigella and named as ispA (Hong, 1998). YciB is an intracellular septation protein A (IspA)-like protein (Pfam PF04279). The ompW-yciCB divergent operon promoter region binds FNR (Federowicz, 2014).	b1254
yciC	None	UPF0259 family inner membrane protein	Null	UPF0259 family protein	The ompW-yciCB divergent operon promoter region binds FNR (Federowicz, 2014).	b1255
ompW	yciD	outer membrane protein W	Putative membrane; Not classified	Outer membrane protein W; colicin S4 receptor	OmpW is the colicin S4 receptor (Pilsl, 1999). OmpW is localized to the cell poles (Lai, 2004). OmpW expression is elevated by exposure to tetracycline or ampicillin (Xu, 2006). The expression of ompW is down-regulated by the RpoE-activated RybB sRNA (Johansen, 2006). FrdAB and OmpW form a complex (Huang, 2006). The ompW-yciCB divergent operon promoter region binds FNR (Federowicz, 2014).	b1256
yciE	None	putative rubrerythrin/ferritin-like metal-binding protein	Null	Rubrerythrin/ferritin-like putative metal-binding protein	yciGFE is transcribed using RpoS and is silenced by HNS and the H-NS silencing is reversed by transcription factor McbR(YncC) (Beraud, 2010). yciF and yciE are paralogs.	b1257
yciF	None	putative rubrerythrin/ferritin-like metal-binding protein	Putative structure; Not classified	Rubrerythrin/ferritin-like putative metal-binding protein; H-NS repressed; dimeric	yciGFE is transcribed using RpoS and is silenced by H-NS and the HNS silencing is reversed by transcription factor McbR(YncC) (Beraud, 2010). Protein sequencing reveals ATG at codon 3 is also utilized as a start. YciF homolog from X. axonopodis pv. passiflorae is upregulated by host plant leaf extract. Salmonella ortholog regulated by RpoS. yciF and yciE are paralogs.	b1258
yciG	None	KGG family protein	Null	KGG family protein; required for swarming phenotype	ymdF and yciG are paralogs. YciG and YmdF may be related to small stress proteins (KGG family, PF10685) and appears to be regulated by RpoS. yciGFE is transcribed using RpoS and is silenced by HNS and the H-NS silencing is reversed by transcription factor McbR(YncC) (Beraud, 2010).	b1259
yciH	None	initiation factor function partial mimic, SUI1 family	Null	Alternative translation initiation factor; binds 30S subunit; eIF1 homolog	YciH is homologous to eukaryotic translation initiation factor eIF-1 (Cort, 1999). YciH binds 30S weakly and does not promote disassociation of subunits. YciH has some tRNA discriminatory activity in vitro. YciH also mimics some eIF1 activities in vitro.	b1282
rem	None	Qin prophage; uncharacterized protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Function unknown, Qin prophage; downstream of relF gene	Null	b1561
hokD	relF	Qin prophage; small toxic polypeptide	Factor; Cell killing	Small toxic membrane polypeptide, Qin prophage; homologous to plasmid-encoded plasmid stabilization toxins regulated by antisense RNA; functional relevance of chromosomal homologs is unknown	hokD regulatory elements are apparently deleted in K-12 and hokD is fused to relBE transcript.	b1562
relE	None	Qin prophage; toxin of the RelE-RelB toxin-antitoxin system	Phage or Prophage Related	Sequence-specific mRNA endoribonuclease, Qin prophage; toxin-antitoxin (TA) pair RelEB, RelE inhibitor of translation cleaves mRNA in A site; binds to its antitoxin RelB and to ribosomes; co-repressor of relB operon transcription; stress-induced	Overproduction of RelE has been shown to increase persistence. Overexpression causes filamentous biofilm formation. Overexpression also reported to inhibit growth (Brown, 2003). Degraded by Lon protease.	b1563
ppsR	duf299, ydiA	PEP synthase kinase and PEP synthase pyrophosphorylase	Regulatory enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Gluconeogenesis	PEP synthase regulatory protein PSRP; bifunctional PEP synthase kinase, ADP-dependent, and PEP synthase pyrophosphorylase, Pi-dependent; tetrameric; DUF299 family	PEP synthase is inactivated by an ADP-dependent (additional) phosphorylation of the phosphorylated active site His421 residue, a reaction mediated by PSRP(YdiA); PEP synthase is activated by a Pi-dependent pyrophosphorylase reaction also mediated by PSRP(YdiA) (Burnell, 2010).	b1703
nlpC	None	putative C40 clan peptidase lipoprotein	Membrane; Macromolecule synthesis, modification: Lipoprotein	Predicted peptidase, C40 clan, lipoprotein; putative PG hydrolase	The first 15 aa of NlpC are a type II signal peptide. Spr, NlpC, YafL and MepH(YdhO) are paralogous members of the NlpC/P60 peptidase superfamily (Pfam entry: PF00877).	b1708
ydjA	None	putative oxidoreductase	Null	Predicted nitroreductase, function unknown, binds FMN; low abundance protein	Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004). nfsA, nfsB, rutE, and ydjA are paralogs. 13/132 YdjA peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is not removed (Maillet, 2007).	b1765
pncA	nam, ydjB	nicotinamidase/pyrazinamidase	Null	Pyrazinamidase/nicotinamidase	Null	b1768
yebB	None	DUF830 family protein	Null	DUF830 family protein, function unknown	A small peptide corresponding to the translation of an antisense ORF of yebB was detected in a shotgun MS experiment (Krug, 2013). YebB, YaeF, YiiX are paralogs that are members of the NlpC superfamily (Anantharaman, 2003).	b1862
yebC	None	UPF0082 family protein	Null	Function unknown, expressed protein, UPF0082 family	A yebC mutation is one of many selected in a strain evolved for resistance to high levels of ionizing radiation; a single yebC deletion mutant has a 2-3 orders of magnitude drop in survival after radiation exposure as compared to a yebC + strain (Byrne, 2014). yeeN and yebC are paralogs. UPF0082.	b1864
nudB	ntpA, orf17, yebD	dihydroneopterin triphosphate pyrophosphatase	Enzyme; folate metabolism	Dihydroneopterin triphosphate pyrophosphohydrolase; early step in folate synthesis 	A nudB mutant has reduced folate synthesis (Gabelli, 2007). NudB also hydrolyzes dATP, 8-hydroxy-2'-deoxyadenosine 5'-triphosphate and 8-hydroxy-2'-deoxyadenosine 5'-diphosphate.	b1865
yecA	None	UPF0149 family protein	Null	UPF0149 family protein	YecA and YgfB are both members of the UPF0149 family of unknown function.	b1908
uvrY	gacA, sirA(S.t.), yecB	response regulator in two-component regulatory system with BarA	Putative regulator; Not classified	Response regulator, pleiotropic; controls the expression of csrB/C sRNAs; hydrogen peroxide resistance; cognate sensor kinase is BarA	Salmonella ortholog regulates virulence gene expression. 4/29 UvrY peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is not removed (Maillet, 2007).	b1914
yedA	None	amino acid exporter for phenylalanine, threonine	Putative membrane; Not classified	Amino acid exporter for phenylalanine, threonine	YedA overproduction enhances phenyalanine and threonine export (Livshits et al., US Patent No. 10302983, filed on 11/25/2002). YedA belongs to the EamA/RhaT transporter family, DMT superfamily.	b1959
yfaA	pufY	DUF2138 family protein, putative host defense protein	Null	DUF2138 family protein, function unknown; predicted host defense protein	yfaA is in the yfaATSQP operon encoding the variant bacterial alpha2-macroglobulin family protein YfaS, leading to a prediction that YfaT is also involved in host defenses, possibly in the extracellular environment (Budd, 2004). The first 19 aa of YfaA are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b2230
ubiG	pufX, yfaB	bifunctional 3-demethylubiquinone-9 3-methyltransferase/ 2-octaprenyl-6-hydroxy phenol methylase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Menaquinone, ubiquinone	SAM:OMHMB methyltransferase; Reactions: 2-octaprenyl-6-hydroxylphenol to 2-octaprenyl-6-methoxyphenol; 2-octaprenyl-3-methyl-5-hydroxy-6-methoxy-1,4-benzoquinone to ubiquinone 8	Null	b2232
yfcA	None	TauE/TSUP family inner membrane protein	Putative structure; Not classified	TauE/TSUP family inner membrane protein; function unknown	Although a wildtype strain was unaffected, a yfcA deletion mutant exhibited 40% survival after 100 minutes at 56C (Kri Ko, 2014). YfcA is a member of the sulfite exporter TauE/SafE family (PF01925) formerly known the UPF0721 family. YfcA is a member of the 4-Toluene Sulfonate Uptake Permease (TSUP) family, which is thought to contain diverse transporters and other membrane proteins; it is suggested that YfcA may be a glycerate uptake porter (Shlykov, 2012). E. coli can utilize glycerate but a transporter gene has not been identified (Umbarger, 1963). 	b2327
yfeA	None	putative diguanylate cyclase	Null	Predicted cyclic-di-GMP phosphodiesterase; dual domain protein; defective cyclase domain; predicted membrane sensor protein	YfeA has an N-terminal MASE1 transmembrane signaling domain, a defective diguanylate cyclase domain, then a C-terminal cyclic-di-GMP phosphodiesterase domain; the PDE domain has EIL instead of EAL but so does YfgF which does have c-di-GMP PDE activity.	b2395
xapR	pRndR, yfeB	transcriptional activator of xapAB	Regulator; Central intermediary metabolism: Nucleotide interconversions	Regulatory gene for xapAB	LysR family.	b2405
yffB	None	putative ArsC family reductase	Null	Predicted reductase, function unknown, ArsC family; low abundance protein	First gene in dapE operon	b2471
gcvR	yffD	transcriptional repressor, regulatory protein accessory to GcvA	Regulator; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	Required for repression of gcv operon by GcvA; GcvA-GcvR repressor complex disrupted by glycine binding to GcvR	The structure of GcvR of Vibrio cholerae has been determined (Kumaran, D. and Swaminathan, S., unpublished). otherPDB: 1U8S. ACT-like domain (Grant, 2006).	b2479
hyfA	yffE	hydrogenase 4, 4Fe-4S subunit	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Hydrogenase 4 component A, ferrodexin-like	Null	b2481
raiA	yfiA	cold shock protein associated with 30S ribosomal subunit	Putative regulator; Not classified	Protein Y, associated with 30S ribosomal subunit; inhibits 70S dimer formation; stabilizes the ribosomal 70S complex against dissociation at low magnesium ion concentrations; counteracts miscoding under stress conditions 	RaiA is a ribosome-associated factor that is induced in stationary phase. The paralogous protein Hpf has opposite effect on 70S dimers.	b2597
yfiB	None	OM lipoprotein putative positive effector of YfiN activity	Putative membrane; Not classified	Probable positive effector of YfiN activity, OM lipoprotein	OmpA homolog. First 18 aa are a type II signal peptide. The P. aeruginosa yfiB ortholog encodes an outer membrane lipoprotein that counteracts the inhibitory effect of YfiR on YfiN diguanylate cyclase activity (Malone, 2010).	b2605
rimM	yfjA	ribosome maturation factor	Enzyme; rRNA processing	Ribosome maturation factor; 30S subunit maturation factor; S19 binding protein	RimM promotes the assembly of some 3'-domain 30S proteins and stabilizes rRNA tertiary structure (Guo, 2013). rimM mutants accumulate 17S rRNA precursors but RimM is not directly involved in 16s rRNA processing (Bylund, 1997; Lovgren, 2004). other PDB (T. thermophilus): 2DOG. otherPDB (P. aeruginosa): 2F1L.	b2608
ppdC	ygdA	putative prepilin peptidase-dependent protein	Putative structural component; Surface structures	Predicted prepilin peptidase-dependent DUF3728 family protein; required for swarming	The N-terminus of PpdC contains an N-terminal cleavage/methylation motif G-FXXXE (PF13544); the first 10 residues of PpdC may be cleaved by prepilin peptidase, making an N-terminal N-methylphenylalanine in the process. PpdC is the prototype for the DUF3728 family of predicted prepilin peptidase-modified proteins of unknown function (PF12528). PpdC is required for swarming motility (Inoue, 2006).	b2823
ygdB	None	DUF2509 family protein	Null	DUF2509 family protein	Possible signal anchor.	b2824
ppdB	ygdC	putative prepilin peptidase-dependent protein	Putative structural component; Surface structures	Predicted prepilin peptidase-dependent protein, FliA-regulated	The N-terminus of PpdB contains an N-terminal cleavage/methylation motif G-FXXXE (PF13544); the first 7 residues of PpdB may be cleaved by prepilin peptidase, making an N-terminal N-methylphenylalanine in the process. ppdB is in the flagella and motility regulon and is both FliA- and FlhDC-regulated; overexpression or deletion of ppdB does not affect motlity or chemotaxis (Park, 2001).	b2825
ygeA	None	Asp/Glu_racemase family protein	Putative transport; Drug/analog sensitivity	Function unknown, Asp/Glu_racemase family	Null	b2840
fau	ygfA	5-formyltetrahydrofolate cyclo-ligase family protein	Putative enzyme; Not classified	5-formyltetrahydrofolate cycloligase, folinic acid catabolism; also known as 5,10-methenyltetrahydrofolate synthase (MTHFS)	Although enzyme activity has not been measured directly in E. coli, the accumulation of 5-CHO-THF (folinic acid ) in the fau(ygfA) mutant is diagnostic for 5-formyltetrahydrofolate cycloligase activity (Jeanguenin, 2010). A deletion of fau(ygfA) is sensitive to sulfonamide antifolate drugs (Ogwang, 2011). fau(ygfA) is induced during biofilm formation.	b2912
argO	yggA	arginine transporter	Null	Arginine exporter	LysE family. Integral membane protein. ArgP regulon.	b2923
mscS	yggB	mechanosensitive channel protein, small conductance	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Other	Mechanosensitive channel protein, intermediate conductance; heptameric	HT_Cmplx47_Mem: MscS+YiaF. mscS, mscK(kefA), mscM(yjeP), ybiO, ybdG and ynaI are paralogs of the MscS family.	b2924
yggC	None	putative PanK family P-loop kinase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Predicted PanK family P-loop kinase, function unknown	YggC and CoaA(PanK) are paralogs.	b2928
yggD	None	MtlR family putative transcriptional repressor	Putative regulator; Not classified	Predicted transcriptional regulator, function unknown	The YggD crystal structure from E. coli strain S.flexneri(PDB:3C8G) has 5 mismatches to the K-12 YggD; MtlR and YggD are paralogs (Tan, 2009).	b2929
ygiB	None	DUF1190 family protein	Null	DUF1190 family protein, function unknown; helps mitigate tolC mutant defects; tolC operon	A mutant lacking ygiB, ygiC, yjfM, yjfC, and tolC has an exacerbated growth defect in mimimal medium and has increased antibiotic sensitivities relative to tolC-alone mutants; the phenotypic defects of the five gene deletion strain are complemented by a tolC plasmid; both the ygiBC and yjfMC deletions are needed to exacerbate the tolA phenotype indicating that YgiBC and YjfMC may have redundant functions; it is not known if all four genes need to be deleted to observe the tolC mutant phenotype exacerbations; tolC-ygiBC constitute an operon (Dhamdhere, 2010). YgiB was previously predicted to have a 35 aa type II signal peptide, however this prediction does not hold for the DUF1190 family; a reevaluation indicates YgiB might have either a signal anchor or a signal peptide (Gonnet, 2004).	b3037
ygiC	None	ATP-Grasp family ATPase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	ATP-Grasp family ATPase, function unknown; helps mitigate tolC mutant defects; tolC operon	Gss, YgiC and YjfC are ATP-Grasp family proteins with ATPase activities, but only Gss has glutathionylspermidine synthase activity (Sui, 2012). YgiC and YjfC do not contain the CHAP amidase domain present in Gss. A mutant lacking ygiB, ygiC, yjfM, yjfC, and tolC has an exacerbated growth defect in mimimal medium and has increased antibiotic sensitivities relative to tolC-alone mutants; the phenotypic defects of the five gene deletion strain are complemented by a tolC plasmid; both the ygiBC and yjfMC deletions are needed to exacerbate the tolA phenotype indicating that YgiBC and YjfMC may have redundant functions; it is not known if all four genes need to be deleted to observe the tolC mutant phenotype exacerbations; tolC-ygiBC constitute an operon (Dhamdhere, 2010).	b3038
ygiD	None	4,5- DOPA-extradiol-dioxygenase	Null	4,5- DOPA-extradiol-dioxygenase	YgiD is a monomeric 4,5- DOPA-extradiol-dioxygenase that converts L-DOPA to betalamic acid and muscaflavin but its native substrates are unknown (Gandía-Herrero, 2013).	b3039
zupT	ygiE	zinc transporter	Null	Zinc and other divalent cation uptake transporter	The zupT synonym ygiE was mistakenly used to refer to ygjE in the abstract of Oshima, 2006 (see the ygjE bibliography).	b3040
ttdA	ygjA	L-tartrate dehydratase, alpha subunit	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Fermentation	L-tartrate dehydratase alpha subunit	Null	b3061
ttdB	ygjB	L-tartrate dehydratase, beta subunit	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Fermentation	L-tartrate dehydratase beta subunit	Null	b3062
tsaD	gcp, ygjD	tRNA(ANN) t(6)A37 threonylcarbamoyladenosine modification protein; glycation binding protein	Enzyme; tRNA modification	tRNA(NNU) t(6)A37 threonylcarbamoyladenosine modification; glycation binding protein	The modified tRNA nucleotide t(6)A37 is derived from the labile cyclized ct(6)A37 during extraction; the tRNA threonylcarbamoyladenosine dehydratase TcdA catalyzes the cyclization reaction (Miyauchi, 2013). TsaBCDE are necessary and sufficient for tRNA(NNU) t(6)A37 threonylcarbamoyladenosine modification in vitro (Deutsch, 2012). TsaD(YgjD) was proposed to be a threonine-bicarbonate ligase producing N-carbamoylthreonine which was proposed to then be transferred to the N(6) group of tRNA(NNU) A37 by TsaC(YrdC); TsaB(YeaZ) is required for the essential function of TsaD(YjgD) (El Yacoubi, 2011). Depletion of TsaD(YgjD) prevents tRNA(NNU) t(6)A37 threonylcarbamoyladenosine modification (Srinivasan, 2010). tsaD(ygjD) mutants accumulate toxic glycated proteins (Amadori-modified proteins); the accumulation of glycated FtsZ in TsaD(YgjD)-depleted cells may explain the genome maintenance phenotype and the unusual cell shapes of tsaD(ygjD) mutants (Katz, 2010). S. cerevisiae Qri7, involved in genome maintenance, complements a tsaD(ygjD) mutant growth defect in E. coli (Oberto, 2009). Loss of TsaD(YgjD) in E. coli causes small cell size and nucleoid loss (Obero, 2009). Depletion of TsaD(YgjD) causes a proportion of cells to be enlarged, with a peripheral distribution of DNA; the TsaD(YgjD) depletion phenotype is suppressed by multicopy clones of rstA (Handford, 2009). TsaD(YgjD) family proteins have been termed UGMPs (Universal Genome Maintenance Proteins) but this may be a pleiotropic phenotype primarily due to a defect in tRNA(NNU) t(6)A37 modification (Oberto, 2009). (TsaB)YeaZ interacts with TsaE(YjeE) and TsaD(YgjD), preferring TsaD(YgjD); TsB(YeaZ) can proteolyze TsaD(YgjD) in vitro (Handford, 2009). TsaD(YgjD) is a homolog of a reported glycoprotease named Gcp, but TsaD(YgjD) does not have glycoprotease activity against glycophorin A and multicopy Gcp (M.h.) expression does not complement an E. coli TsaD(YgjD) deficiency, indicating that M. hemolytica Gcp and E. coli YgjD are not isofunctional orthologs; Gcp (M.h.) may not partner properly with the E. coli TsaB(YeaZ) protein (Handford, 2009). The identification of M. hemolytica Gcp as a glycoprotease was probably incorrect (Srinivasan, 2010). Since TsaD(YgjD) does not have glycoprotese activity and the homologous M. hemolytica Gcp is also probably not a glycoprotease, gcp was retired as the primary gene name for tsaD(ygjD). The tsaD-rpsUdnaGrpoD divergent operon promoter region binds ArcA (Federowicz, 2014).	b3064
tdcD	yhaA	propionate kinase/acetate kinase C, anaerobic	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Propionate kinase, anaerobic; non-essential gene	otherPDB (S. typhimurium): 1X3M, 1X3N.	b3115
yhaB	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Function unknown	Null	b3120
yhaC	None	pentapetide repeats-related protein	Null	Pentapetide repeats-related protein, function unknown	YhaC is distantly related to the pentapeptide repeats protein family (NCBI COG1357) and has four pentapeptide repeats (residues 151-170) that are similar to a reported consensus (Vetting, 2006). Like the pentapeptide repeats protein gene yjcF, yhaC is in one of the regions of extreme structure (RES12), perhaps correlated to the DNA mimic role proposed for pentapeptide repeats proteins. YhaC is 43% similar across 214 residues to the pseudogene-encoded pentapeptide repeats protein YjbI'.	b3121
garK	yhaD	glycerate kinase I	Null	Glycerate 2-kinase, glycolate-, glycerate- or glucarate-inducible; GKI; produces 2-phospho-glycerate	Null	b3124
garR	yhaE	tartronate semialdehyde reductase	Null	Tartronate semialdehyde reductase, glycerate- or galactarate-inducible	Null	b3125
truB	yhbA	tRNA pseudouridine synthase B: tRNA pseudouridine(55) synthase and putative tmRNA pseudouridine(342) synthase	Enzyme; tRNA modification	tRNA pseudouridine(55) synthase; tRNA pseudouridine synthase B; putative tmRNA pseudouridine(342) synthase	TruB is probably a dual specificity enzyme responsible for the formation of pseudouridine at position U342 in tmRNA in addition to tRNA U55 pseudouridinylation (Nurse, 1995; Feldon, 1998). truB mutants are sensitive to extreme heat shock.	b3166
rbfA	sdr-43, yhbB	30s ribosome binding factor	Factor; Proteins - translation and modification	Ribosome binding factor required for efficient processing of 16s rRNA; cold-shock adaptation protein; overexpression suppresses cold-sensitive 16S rRNA	Null	b3167
rimP	yhbC	ribosome maturation factor for 30S subunits	Null	Factor required for maturation of 30S ribosomal subunits	RimP is associated with free 30S subunits, but not 50S or mature ribosomes (Nord, 2009). The TTG at position 3 could be start codon, poor RBSs all around, alignments more consistent to TTG.	b3170
mscL	stkA, yhdC	mechanosensitive channel protein, high conductance	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Other	Mechanosensitive channel protein, high conductance; homopentameric	The E. coli PDB structures for MscL are homology models. otherPDB (M. tuberculosis): 1MSL. otherPDB (S. aureus): 3HZQ. Links are provided to Table 1 and Figure 4A from Pivetti (2003).	b3291
bfd	yheA	bacterioferritin-associated ferredoxin	Null	Bacterioferritin-associated ferredoxin; predicted redox component complexing with Bfr in iron storage and mobility [2Fe-2S]	Null	b3337
yhfA	None	OsmC family protein	Null	OsmC family protein, function unknown	Null	b3356
damX	yhfB	cell division protein that binds to the septal ring	Putative membrane; Cell division	Cell division protein, binds septal ring; bile salts resistance	A damX mutant is bile-sensitive, as is a downstream dam mutant, but the damX phenotype is complemented by a damX clone indicating it is not a polar effect on dam (Arends, 2010). Overexpression of DamX induces cell filamentation (Lyngstadaas, 1995). Overexpression of DamX causes filamentous biofilm formation (Tenorio, 2003). DamX has a 100 aa cytoplasmic domain, a single transmembrane region, and a C-terminal SPOR domain. DamX localizes to the septal ring, via the SPOR domain, and damX mutants are defective in cell division (Gerding, 2009; Arends, 2010). DamX interacts with FtsQ and other cell division proteins in a bacterial two-hybrid assay and may be a negative regulator of FtsQ function (Arends, 2010). HT_Cmplx49_Mem: DamX+BamA.	b3388
yhhA	None	DUF2756 family protein	Null	DUF2756 family protein	The first 17 aa of YhhA are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. 	b3448
yiaA	None	YiaAB family inner membrane protein, tandem domains	Null	YiaAB family inner membrane protein, tandem domains	yiaB and yiaA are paralogs.	b3562
yibA	None	putative immunity protein for polymorphic toxin RhsA; HEAT-domain protein; lethality reduction protein	Null	Putative immunity protein for polymorphic toxin RhsA; HEAT-domain protein; lethality reduction protein	YibA coexpression mitigates the deleterious effects (a stationary phase-dependent viability block) of overexpressing the C-terminal portion of RhsA (Vlazny, 1995). Mutations in yibA have a hyperlethality phenotype when cells are stressed; YibA is a protein that reduces the lethal effects of stress (Han, 2010). The yibA gene is downstream of the rhsA predicted polymorphic toxin gene and yibA is predicted to encode an immunity protein (Zhang, 2012). YibA is comprised of HEAT-repeat domains (Pfam PF13646).	b3594
yibB	htrL	YibB family protein, function unknown	Phenotype; Not classified	YibB family protein, function unknown	yibB was named htrL in a 1996 DNA sequence submission (M94888) but no data has been published; htrL is used as a synonym for yibB.	b3618
waaC	rfaC, yibC	ADP-heptose:LPS heptosyl transferase I	Enzyme; Macromolecule metabolism: Lipopolysaccharide	LPS heptosyltransferase I; LPS core biosynthesis; transfers innermost heptose to KDO	Overexpression causes abnormal biofilm architecture. The RfaC (WaaC) PDB structures are from strain RS218 (Grizot, 2006).	b3621
coaD	kdtB, yicA	pantetheine-phosphate adenylyltransferase	Enzyme; Not classified	Phosphopantetheine adenylyltransferase	Null	b3634
slmA	ttk, yicB	nucleoid occlusion factor, anti-FtsZ division inhibitor	Putative regulator; Not classified	DNA-binding anti-FtsZ division inhibitor, dimeric; nucleoid occlusion factor; regulates FtsZ assembly and blocks septal ring formation at SBS sites	SlmA disassembles FtsZ polymers in vitro (Cho, 2011). SlmA is an anti-FtsZ factor interfering with FtsZ polymerization at SlmA-binding sequences (SBSs) on the chromosome (Cho, 2011; Tonthat, 2011). TetR family.	b3641
yicC	orfX	UPF0701 family protein	Phenotype; Not classified	UPF0701 family protein, function unknown	A deletion of dinD(pcsA,orfY) forms filaments and has a reduced plating efficiency on kanamycin in rich medium at late stationary phase, and exhibits growth defects at 45C; these phenotypes were exacerbated in a yicC(orfX) dinD(pcsA,orfY) double mutant; a yicC(orfX) single mutant was not tested (Poulsen, 1991).	b3644
dinD	orfY, pcsA, yicD	DNA damage-inducible protein	Phenotype; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	DNA-damage-inducible protein, function unknown	Null mutants of dinD(pcsA,orfY) are viable in normal growth conditions (Poulsen, 1989; Ohmori, 1995). dinB and pcsA are allelic (Lewis, 1994; Lundegaard, 1994; Ohmori, 1995). A dinD68(pcsA68) point mutant (V239M) has a cold-sensitive growth phenotype, forming filaments with large nucleoids, that is suppressible by recA or lexA mutations (Ohmori, 1995). The cold-sensitive growth phenotype of dinD68(pcsA68)-cs is multi-copy suppressible by lexA, dinG and dinI (Yasuda, 1996). A deletion of dinD(pcsA,orfY) forms filaments and has a reduced plating efficiency on kanamycin in rich medium at late stationary phase, and exhibits growth defects at 45C; these phenotypes were exacerbated in a yicC(orfX) dinD(pcsA,orfY) double mutant; a yicC(orfX) single mutant was not tested (Poulsen, 1991). LexA regulon.	b3645
xanP	yicE	xanthine permease	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Nucleosides, purines, pyrimidines	Xanthine permease	xanP is predicted to belong to the PurR regulon.	b3654
yidA	None	sugar phosphate phosphatase	Null	Erythrose 4-P and mannose 1-P phosphatase; alpha-D-glucose-1-P phosphatase, anomer-specific; phosphoramidase; physiological role unknown; additional in vitro substrates include: ribose-5-P, fructose-1-P, fructose-6-P, glucose-6-P, acetyl phosphate; HAD13	HAD superfamily. In vitro activities demonstrated by Kuznetsova et al. (2005, 2006).	b3697
yidB	None	DUF937 family protein	Null	DUF937 family protein, function unknown	otherPDB (S. flexneri): 1Z67. Although the PDB structure is derived from E. coli strain Shigella flexneri 2a str. 2457T, there are only three amino acid differences from the K-12 YibB; structural similarity to homeodomain proteins suggests a DNA-binding function for YidB (Osipiuk, 2006).	b3698
yidC	None	membrane protein insertase	Membrane; Inner membrane	Membrane protein insertase; inner membrane protein integration factor; binds TM regions of nascent IMPs; required for Sec-independent IMP integration; associated with the Sec translocase	yidC is an essential gene. YidC depletion activates the Psp response. YidC is required for proper membrane insertion of AtpE and CyoA. YidC assists proper folding of membrane proteins and thus is a chaperone as well.	b3705
glmU	tms(B.s.), yieA	fused N-acetyl glucosamine-1-phosphate uridyltransferase/glucosamine-1-phosphate acetyl transferase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Sugar-nucleotide biosynthesis, conversions	Bifunctional glucosamine-1-phosphate acetyltransferase and N-acetylglucosamine-1-phosphate uridylyltransferase, hexameric	GlmU contains 22 hexapeptide repeats. Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004). HT_Cmplx21_Cyt: GlmU+Pta.	b3730
mioC	yieB	FMN-binding protein MioC	Factor; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	Required for biotin synthase activity in vitro; flavodoxin-like FMN-binding protein; transcription of mioC through oriC may have physiological significance in suboptimal conditions	DnaA regulon.	b3742
yigA	None	DUF484 family protein	Null	DUF484 family protein, function unknown	Null	b3810
yigB	None	5-amino-6-(5-phospho-D-ribitylamino)uracil phosphatase; pyrimidine phosphatase; riboflavin synthesis	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Riboflavin	5-amino-6-(5-phospho-D-ribitylamino)uracil phosphatase; pyrimidine phosphatase; riboflavin synthesis	YbjI and YigB redundantly catalyze the fourth step in riboflavin synthesis; these enzymes have remained unknown for many years; other promiscuous HAD superfamily enzymes may also be able to perform this reaction (Haase, 2013). YigB also has FMN phosphatase activity in vitro (Kuznetsova, 2006). HAD superfamily, HAD7 family.	b3812
yihA	engB	cell division GTP-binding protein	Null	GTP-binding protein required for normal cell division; predicted GTPase; also binds GDP	YihA was reported to be an essential gene by Arigoni (1998), but Dassain (1999) made a viable null mutant that grows slowly and forms filaments. Filamentation phenotype is suppressed by overexpression of ftsQI, ftsA and ftsZ. Unlike the other 11 GTPases in E. coli, YihA is not universally conserved among bacteria. Der and YihA are paralogs, with YihA matching the C-terminal GTPase domain better than the N-terminal GTPase domain. 2/52 YihA(EngB) peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed (Maillet, 2007).	b3865
murI	dga, glr, yijA	glutamate racemase	Enzyme; Murein sacculus, peptidoglycan	Glutamate racemase, D-glutamate synthesis	murI is an essential gene. MurI can inhibit DNA gyrase activity (Ashiuchi, 2002).	b3967
murB	yijB	UDP-N-acetylenolpyruvoylglucosamine reductase, FAD-binding	Enzyme; Murein sacculus, peptidoglycan	UDP-N-acetylenolpyruvoylglucosamine reductase, FAD-binding	Null	b3972
yjaA	None	stress-induced protein	Null	Stress-induced protein, function unknown; involved in peroxide and acid resistance	A yjaA mutant strain is sensitive to hydrogen peroxide and acid (Lee, 2009). 	b4011
yjaB	None	GNAT-family putative N-acetyltransferase; acetyl coenzyme A-binding protein	Null	GNAT-family putative N-acetyltransferase; acetyl coenzyme A binding protein	NMR shift experiments indicate that YjaB is an acetyl coenzyme A binding protein, N-acetyltransferase assays were not performed (Lu, 2009). yjaB is transcribed divergently from a promoter that overlaps the metA promoter.	b4012
arpA	yjaC	ankyrin repeat protein	Null	Ankyrin repeat protein, function unknown	ArpA was previosly reported to be a regulator of acetyl CoA synthase synthesis based on a personal communication from A. J. Wolfe (1996) cited in P23325, however this is now contradicted in Wolfe (2005).	b4017
psiE	yjbA	phosphate starvation inducible protein	Null	Pho regulon, regulated by phoB and cAMP	Null	b4030
crfC	yjdA	clamp-binding sister replication fork colocalization protein, dynamin-related	Phenotype; Not classified	Clamp-binding sister replication fork colocalization protein; dynamin-related protein, homomultimeric; mutational suppressor of yhjH motility defect	CrfC(YjdA) binds to the DNA replisome sliding clamp (DnaN) and colocalizes nascent sister replication forks; purified CrfC(YjdA) has very weak GTPase activity; the membrane binding domain of other dynamin proteins is replaced by a DnaN-binding domain including a binding motif at residues Q41-P45; a Q41A mutant loses clamp binding; GTP does not affect clamp binding in vitro; CrfC(YjdA) binds free or bound DnaN but does not bind naked DNA (Ozaki, 2013). The motility defect of yhjH mutations is suppressed by multicopy yfgF and by mutations in ycgR, fliZ, yfiR, yegE, crfC(yjdA), and yjcZ (Girgis, 2007). crfC(yjdA)-yjcZ are predicted to constitute an operon. CrfC(YjdA) has a Pfam PF00350 Dynamin_N domain and is a member of the dynamin GTPase superfamily.	b4109
epmA	genX, poxA, yjeA	Elongation Factor P Lys34 lysyltransferase	Enzyme; Protein modification	Elongation Factor P Lys34 lysyltransferase; required for EF-P-mediated translation of polyprolines	The pleiotropic phenotypes associated with epmA(poxA) mutations include synthesis of poxB, hypersensitivity to sulfometuron methyl, alpha-keto butyrate, and many amino acid analogs, slow growth rate, and hypersensitivity to many antibiotics and dyes; these phenotypes are likely due to impaired translation of polyproline-containing proteins, a function of EF-P that requires the EpmAB-mediated lysine34 lysylation (Doerfel, 2012; Ude, 2012). EpmA(YjeA) and EpmB(YjeK) are required to modify EF-P Lys34 by lysylation of the epsilon amino group; failure to modify EF-P with lysine results in a slow growth defect; EpmB(YjeK) may convert alpha-lysyl-EF-P to beta-lysyl-EF-P (Yanagisawa, 2010). A third and final EF-P post-translation modification enzyme EpmC(YfcM) is identified as EF-P-Lys34 hydroxylase; EpmC(YfcM) acts after beta-lysinylation of Lys34 by EpmA(YjeA) and EpmB(YjeK); EpmC(YfcM) adds an oxygen atom to the C5 position of Lys34 and does not modify the added beta-lysine; YjeA and YjeK were renamed as EpmA and EpmB, respectively (Peil, 2012). EpmA(YjeA) and EpmB(YjeK) were predicted to be responsible for the modification of EF-P Lys34 with spermidine, but Lys34 is actually modified with another lysine, not spermidine; epmB(yjeK) is in the efp genetic neighborhood in many strains and all genomes that have the conserved Lys34 in EF-P have epmB(yjeK) orthologs; EpmB(YjeK) is a lysine 2,3-aminomutase homolog (but in a different clade) (Bailly, 2010; Yanagisawa, 2010). The epmA(yjeA) pleiotropic phenotypes are not due to a defect in pyruvate oxidase and the apparent regulation of poxB may be a minor role for EpmA(YjeA). OtherPDB(S. typhimurium): 3G1Z.	b4155
nsrR	yjeB	nitric oxide-sensitive repressor for NO regulon	Null	Nitric oxide-sensitive repressor; regulates hmp, ygbA, ytfE, tehA and hcp-hcr	NsrR is a weak regulator of tehA. tehA clones may titrate out NsrR. NsrR is homologous to NsrR of Nitrosomonas europaea.	b4178
yjjA	None	putative DUF2501 family periplasmic protein	Putative factor; Not classified	Predicted periplasmic DUF2501 protein, function unknown	The first 25 aa of YjjA are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. YjjA (P18) is expressed by readthrough from dnaTC promoter.	b4360
yjjB	None	DUF3815 family inner membrane protein	Null	UPF0442 family protein, function unknown	Although a wildtype strain was unaffected, a yjjB deletion mutant exhibited 40% survival after one hour in 1 M NaCl (Kri Ko, 2014). The original yjjB sequence had a C-terminal frameshift extending YjjB, but homology analysis suggests that the extension is artifactual. No YjjB protein was expressed in minicells, but a LacZ fusion indicates this gene is expressed. Homology extends upstream to end of yjjP gene, but the predicted MW is a little higher than observed. A GTG alternate start at codon 3 has a better apparent RBS and would be coupled with the motif GTGA to the upstream gene stop codon. However the GTG start is not conserved in Salmonella and Yersinia, while the ATG start is conserved.	b4363
creA	yjjD	putative periplasmic protein	Null	Predicted periplasmic protein, function unknown	The first 21 aa of CreA are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. creA is the first gene in the creABC-creD region. CreA is the prototype for the CreA family of proteins of unknown function (PF05981).	b4397
creB	ORF2, yjjE	response regulator in two-component regulatory system with CreC	Regulator; Global regulatory functions	Response regulator for CreBC regulon; induced by growth in minimal medium	Null	b4398
ydcA	None	putative periplasmic protein	Null	Putative periplasmic protein	The first 20 aa of YdcA are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b1419
zwf	None	glucose-6-phosphate 1-dehydrogenase	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Oxidative branch, pentose pathway	Glucose-6-phosphate 1-dehydrogenase	Residues 199-203 of zwf encode a NNWDN peptide Extracellular Death Factor (EDF) involved in ChpA(MazF) toxicity that is likely converted to NNWNN by AsnA; a zwf deletion prevents NNWNN activity (Kolodkin-Gal, 2007). ClpXP is probably involved in producing EDF from Zwf (Kolodkin-Gal, 2008). HT_Cmplx19_Cyt: PepD+Pgm+Zwf.	b1852
alkA	aidA	3-methyl-adenine DNA glycosylase II	Enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	3-methyl-adenine DNA glycosylase II, inducible; repairs by single-and double-strand excision of 3-methyl adenine	Null	b2068
argH	None	argininosuccinate lyase	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Arginine	Argininosuccinate lyase	Null	b3960
fliO	flbD	flagellar biosynthesis protein	Putative structure; Surface structures	Flagellin export apparatus, integral membrane protein	Flagellar regulon.	b1947
dcuA	genA	C4-dicarboxylate antiporter	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	C4-dicarboxylate transporter, anaerobic	IT (Ion Transporter) superfamily (Prakash, 2003). ST(3) structural class based on hydropathy profile (Lolkema, 2003).	b4138
leuA	None	2-isopropylmalate synthase	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Leucine	Alpha-isopropylmalate synthase	LeuA catalyzes the first step of leucine biosynthesis.	b0074
fdnG	None	formate dehydrogenase-N, alpha subunit, nitrate-inducible	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Formate dehydrogenase-N, selenopeptide, anaerobic; FDH-N; periplasmic	Verified Tat substrate: FdnG has a Tat-only (Class I) predicted 37 aa signal peptide (Tullman-Ercek, 2007). Bound FdnH is co-exported. HT_Cmplx12_Mem: FdnG+FdnH. The UGA stop codon 196 is translated as selenocysteine in vivo and indicated as a "U" in the protein sequence.	b1474
fdnH	None	formate dehydrogenase-N, Fe-S (beta) subunit, nitrate-inducible	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Formate dehydrogenase-N, Fe-S subunit, anaerobic; FDH-N; periplasmic	FdnH is co-exported bound to Tat substrate FdnG. HT_Cmplx12_Mem: FdnG+FdnH. 	b1475
fdnI	None	formate dehydrogenase-N, cytochrome B556 (gamma) subunit, nitrate-inducible	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Formate dehydrogenase-N, cytochrome subunit, anaerobic; FDH-N	Null	b1476
melR	None	melibiose operon transcriptional regulator; autoregulator	Regulator; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Transcriptional activator for melAB, AraC family; autoregulatory repressor in absence of co-activator melibiose	The C-terminal domain of the RNA polymerase alpha subunit is important for MelR-dependent activation of the melAB promoter. An 18 base pair MelR binding site is necessary for MelR transcription activation because it ensures correct interactions with RNA polymerase sigma subunit.	b4118
rpmI	None	50S ribosomal subunit protein L35	Structural component; Ribosomal proteins - synthesis, modification	50S ribosomal subunit protein A (L35)	Null	b1717
rpmJ	secX	50S ribosomal subunit protein L36	Structural component; Ribosomal proteins - synthesis, modification	50S ribosomal subunit protein X (L36)	Non-essential gene; mutant cells grow slowly. Not in archael ribosomes. Penetrates and organizes 50S subunit.	b3299
rstB	uspT	sensory histidine kinase of RstAB two-component system	Regulator; Global regulatory functions	Sensory histidine kinase of RstAB two-component system, low Mg-responsive via PhoQP	Mg(2+) stimulon-PhoPQ regulon, EvgAS-PhoPQ cascade enhanced-expression subset. The ydgC-rstAB divergent promoter region binds ArcA and ArcA activates rstAB expression (Federowicz, 2014).	b1609
ydiB	None	quinate/shikimate 5-dehydrogenase, NAD(P)-binding	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Quinate/shikimate dehydrogenase, NAD(P)-dependent	YdiB is paralogous to AroE. Low catalytic efficiency may indicate a different in vivo substrate.	b1692
rhlE	None	ATP-dependent RNA helicase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	ATP-dependent RNA helicase, in RNA degradasome	RNA-stimulated ATPase activity and ATP-dependent RNA helciase activities have been demonstrated in vitro for RhlE (Bizebard, 2004). rhlE is transiently after a cold shock, dependent on the presence of PNPase. RhlE binds RNaseE. RhlE is in the RNA degradosome. DEAD-box protein family.	b0797
yahA	None	c-di-GMP-specific phosphodiesterase	Null	c-di-GMP-specific phosphodiesterase, PDE-A; reaction product is 5'pGpG; dependent on Mg+2 or Mn+2, Ca+2 inhibitory; optimum pH 9.35; monomeric	YahA has a C-terminal EAL domain. The EAL domain alone can perform PDE-A activity. YahA has an N-terminal LuxR putative regulator domain.	b0315
chiA	yheB	periplasmic endochitinase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Periplasmic endochitinase/lysozyme, Hns-repressible	The first 24 aa of ChiA are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b3338
ybhB	None	kinase inhibitor homolog, UPF0098 family	Null	Raf kinase inhibitor RKIP homolog, function unknown; UPF0098 family; cytoplasmic protein	The YbhB N-terminus with Met was identified by MS/MS sequencing (Tao, 2009).	b0773
ybhA	modD	pyridoxal phosphate (PLP) phosphatase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Pyridoxal phosphate (PLP) phosphatase; phosphoramidase; physiological role unknown; HAD14	HAD superfamily. In vitro activities demonstrated by Kuznetsova et al. (2005, 2006). ybhA is a non-essential gene.	b0766
hokB	ydcB	toxic polypeptide, small	Null	Small toxic membrane polypeptide; homologous to plasmid-encoded plasmid stabilization toxins regulated by antisense RNA; functional relevance of chromosomal homologs is unknown	Null	b4428
ycaC	None	putative isochorismatase family hydrolase	Null	Predicted hydrolase, isochorismatase family, function unknown; homologous to pyrazinamidase and carbamoylsarcosine amidohydrolase; homooctamer	Leu-155 is a Met-155 in the crystallized protein, a commercial GAD prep from Worthington.	b0897
ycaD	None	putative MFS transporter, inner membrane protein	Putative transport; Not classified	Predicted MFS transporter, function unknown; inner membrane protein	YcaD is a member of the Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS) of transporters.	b0898
yggE	None	oxidative stress defense protein	Phenotype; Not classified	Oxidative stress defense, DUF541 family, mechanism unknown	YggE has been detected as a membrane-bound homo-octamer (Maddalo, 2011).	b2922
yggF	yggK	fructose 1,6 bisphosphatase isozyme	Null	Fructose 1,6 bisphosphatase activity	YggF and GlpX are paralogs.	b2930
uspE	ydaA	stress-induced protein	Null	Stress-induced protein; UV-resistance; tandem Usp domains	Null	b1333
rlmD	rumA, ygcA	23S rRNA m(5)U1939 methyltransferase, SAM-dependent	Enzyme; rRNA modification	23S rRNA m(5)U1939 methyltransferase, SAM-dependent	Although the purified RlmD protein had its N-terminus sequenced (reported in Medline 21883956, Agarwalla et al.) it is not included in the Verified set since translation was forced at the predicted start codon. All other evidence does point to this being the correct start. The initial Met is cleaved off.	b2785
mazF	chpA, chpAK	mRNA interferase toxin, antitoxin is MazE	Putative factor; Not classified	mRNA interferase toxin, antitoxin is MazE; inhibitor of translation by mRNA cleavage	MazF is a sequence-specific (ACA) endoribonuclease, induced by amino acid starvation, but in a lon-dependent, ppGpp-independent fashion. MazE homodimer binds two homodimers of MazF. MazF inhibitory effects on translation is reversed by tmRNA. MazF-mediated cell death requires the NNWNN pentapeptide (called EFD for Extracellular Death Factor) appears to be derived from the zwf gene (residues 199-203) and ClpXP is implicated in its production; AsnA appears to be responsible for the NNWDN to NNWNN conversion; ygeO was thought to be required to generate the pentapeptide (in MC4100) but subsequent work demonstrated that overproduction of Zwf could suppresss the YgeO' mutant defect, indicating a secondary role for YgeO' (Kolodkin-Gal, 2007; 2008). ygeO' is an apparent pseudogene in MG1655 and in MC4100 as well, so the ygeO' pseudogene is not responsible for the failure of MG1655 to produce or respond to normal levels of ECD. The MazF ortholog of M. xanthus mediates programmed cell death during fruiting body formation (Nariya, 2008).	b2782
chpS	chpBI, yjfB	antitoxin of the ChpBS toxin-antitoxin system	Phenotype; Not classified	ChpS antitoxin, toxin is ChpB	Null	b4224
ychA	sirB1(S.t.)	transglutaminase-like TPR-repeat protein	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Transglutaminase-like TPR-repeat protein	YchA has an N-terminal transglutaminase-like domain (PF13369) and a C-terminal TPR-repeat domain (PF13371). YchA(SirB1) of Salmonella upregulates sirC expression, but E. coli K-12 does not have a sirC ortholog (Rakeman, 1999).	b1214
mukE	kicA, ycbA	chromosome condensin MukBEF, MukE localization factor	Null	Chromosome condensin MukBEF, MukE localization factor	Condensin is required for chromosome partitioning and compaction. Null mutants die above 30C and produce some anucleate cells at permissive temperatures. MukE is involved in focal subcellular localization of MukBEF (She, 2012).	b0923
ldtD	ycbB	murein L,D-transpeptidase	Enzyme; Murein sacculus, peptidoglycan	Murein L,D-transpeptidase, periplasmic	LdtD(YcbB) catalyzes the rare meso-DAP(3)-->meso-DAP(3) murein cross-links (Magnet, 2008). The first 30 aa of LdtD are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b0925
rlmH	ybeA	23S rRNA m(3)Psi1915 pseudouridine methyltransferase, SAM-dependent	Enzyme; rRNA modification	23S rRNA m(3)Psi1915 pseudouridine methyltransferase; SAM-dependent	SPOUT family methyltransferase. Founding function member of UPF0247.	b0636
rsfS	rsfA, slm3, ybeB	ribosomal silencing factor	Factor; Ribosomes - maturation and modification	Ribosomal silencing factor	RsfS(YbeB) binds to ribosomal protein L14 and impairs ribosomal subunit joining during stationary phase and nutrient shift-down (Häuser, 2012). RsfS(YbeB) is homologous to the iojap pattern-striping gene of maize; DUF143 family. rsfS(ybeB) is a non-essential gene as shown by the tolerance of an insertion; the polar slm3 insertion is a synthetic lethal with minCD and causes a wide-cell phenotype in min+ cells; the rsfS(ybeB) phenotypes were attributed to reduced expression of downstream genes mrdA(pbpA) and/or mrdB(rodA), not rsfS(ybeB) itself, as shown with complementing plasmids (Bernhardt, 2004). The published gene name rsfA is changed to rsfS to avoid conflicts with different genes named rsfA earlier (P. Uetz, personal communication). RsfS(YbeB) is a ribosome-associated protein (Jiang, 2007).	b0637
iraP	yaiB	anti-RssB factor, RpoS stabilzer during Pi starvation; anti-adapter protein	Null	Anti-RssB factor, RpoS stabilzer during Pi starvation; anti-adapter protein	IraP interferes with RssB, ClpXP-dependent degradation of RpoS by interacting directly with RssB.	b0382
yaiC	adrA(S.t.)	diguanylate cyclase, cellulose regualtor	Null	Cellulose, biofilm, motility regulator, diguanylate cyclase; CsgD-regulated; membrane sensor protein	YaiC has an N-terminal MASE2 (PF05230) transmembrane sensory domain and a C-terminal GGDEF domain. RpoS regulon (Weber, 2006). YaiC/YoaC may be a c-di-GMP synthesis/degradation module regulated by CsgA involved in controlling cellulose biosynthesis (Brombacher, 2006).	b0385
focA	ycaE	formate channel	Putative transport; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Formate channel; mutants are hypophosphite resistance and have elevated intracellular formate and reduced excreted formate	FocA is a membrane protein with six TM regions. GUG start codon confirmed by mutagenesis.	b0904
rnr	vacB, yjeC	exoribonuclease R, RNase R	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Exoribonuclease R, RNase R	YbeY and RNase R work together to remove 33 nucleotides from the 3' end of rRNA and to degrade aberrant rRNAs; YbeY has in vitro RNase activity (Jacod, 2013). Four ribonucleases, Rnc, Rnr, Pnp and Rph, redundantly process 16S rRNA, and although this does not rule out a role for YbeY as co-ribonuclease with Rnr, the role of YbeY as being the nuclease activity responsible for the removal of the 33 nucleotides at the 3' end of 16S rRNA has been questioned (Sulthana, 2013). RNase R (Rnr) is de-stabilized by proteolysis in exponential phase relative to stationary phase due to Pka-mediated acetylation of Rnr Lys544 in exponential phase only; lysine-acetylated Rnr binds tmRNA-SmpB tightly for exponential phase Rnr protein degradation (Liang, 2010; Liang, 2011). Rnr is specifically required for SsrA-SmpB-dependent decay of non-stop aberrant mRNAs (Richards, 2006). The N-terminal cold shock domains are required for an intrinsic Rnr RNA unwinding (helicase) activity (Awano, 2009). The cold shock domains are dispensible for Rnr RNase activity on structured RNAs (Vincent, 2009). rnr is transiently induced after a cold shock. rnr is orthologous with Shigella virulence gene vacB. 	b4179
yifB	None	magnesium chelatase family protein and putative transcriptional regulator	Putative regulator; Not classified	Competence Mg chelatase ComM homolog, function unknown	ComM homolog. yifB is predicted to have a CRP-S promoter co-regulated by both Crp and Sxy (Cameron, 2006).	b3765
nfsA	mda18, mdaA, snrA(S.t.), ybjB	nitroreductase A, NADPH-dependent, FMN-dependent	Phenotype; Not classified	Nitroreductase A; oxygen-insensitive, NADPH, FMN-dependent, major; reduces a variety of nitroaromatics, e.g. dihydropteridine, nitrofurantoin, nitrofurazone, quinones; SoxS regulon; homodimeric	NfsA overexpression results in resistance to cytotoxic drugs including Adriamycin and the tumoricidal agent DMP 840. nfsA is in the MprA regulon (Marbach, 2012). nfsA is co-transcribed with ybjC. nfsA, nfsB, rutE, and ydjA are paralogs. 16/258 NfsA peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is not removed (Maillet, 2007).	b0851
tsgA	gutS, yhfC, yhfH	putative transporter	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative transporter, tellurite-inducible, function unknown; also induced by selenite	Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS).	b3364
gspB	pinO, pioO	part of gsp divergon involved in type II protein secretion	Factor; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	Part of H-NS-silenced gsp-alpha (T2SS-alpha) divergon, type II protein secretion; cloned gsp-alpha (T2SS-alpha) divergon secretes ChiA, requires gspAB operon	GspB is a distant homolog or convergent analog of exeB of A. hydrophila, which is required for protein export, specifically for the export and assembly of secretin (ExeD/GspD) into the outer membrane. GspB has a single predicted N-terminal transmembrane segment (28-50), followed by a predicted periplasmic domain, which may interact with GspA. GspA may interact with GspB. A divergon is a regulon comprised of two adjacent divergent operons or genes. gspB was initially identified as an ORF that might be the 11.3 kDa PinO protein synthesized in the absence of isoleucine in relA stains (Guzman, 1991). But GspB is predicted to be 15.9 kDa and has isoleucine residues and there is no evidence that gspB encodes the PinO peptide or that it binds calcium. No homology to calmodulin or other calcium-binding proteins is predicted. gspB may have been mistaken for pinO due to use of a downstream ATG as start codon, but the 11 kD C-terminal fragment does have an Ile reside in it, making gspB inconsistent with pinO. pioO was the prior gene name assigned to pinO since the gene name pin was already taken.	b3322
cmk	mssA, ycaF, ycaG	cytidylate kinase	Enzyme; Pyrimidine ribonucleotide biosynthesis	Cytidylate kinase; multicopy suppressor of UMP kinase mutations	8/82 Cmk peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed; 5/82 peptide masses also indicate the Met is occasionally not clipped (Maillet, 2007).	b0910
waaH	yibD	LPS(HepIII)-glucuronic acid glycosyltransferase	Putative regulator; Not classified	LPS(HepIII)-glucuronic acid glycosyltransferase	WaaH(YibD) is the glycosyltransferase responsible for adding beta-glucuronic acid (GlcUA) to the third heptose (HepIII) of LPS; GlucUA-modified LPS lacks phosphate on HepII (Klein, 2013). waaH(yibD) is in the PhoB regulon (Baek, 2006). BasRS regulon.	b3615
yiaB	None	YiaAB family inner membrane protein	Null	YiaAB family inner membrane protein	YiaB may also have a degenerate C-terminal YiaB domain. YiaB has been topology mapped using protein fusions. yiaB and yiaA are paralogs. Probable false positive lipoprotein prediction, Cys not conserved.	b3563
fmt	yhdD	10-formyltetrahydrofolate:L-methionyl-tRNA(fMet) N-formyltransferase	Enzyme; Aminoacyl tRNA synthetases, tRNA modification	Methionyl-tRNA formyltransferase	Null	b3288
hisL	None	his operon leader peptide	Leader; Amino acid biosynthesis: Histidine	his operon leader peptide	Null	b2018
ilvL	None	ilvG operon leader peptide	Leader; Amino acid biosynthesis: Isoleucine, Valine	ilvG operon leader peptide	Null	b3766
pheL	pheAE	pheA gene leader peptide	Leader; Amino acid biosynthesis: Phenylalanine	pheA gene regulatory leader peptide	Null	b2598
pheM	phtL	phenylalanyl-tRNA synthetase operon leader peptide	Leader; Aminoacyl tRNA synthetases, tRNA modification	pheST operon regulatory leader peptide	Null	b1715
trpL	trpEE	trp operon leader peptide	Leader; Amino acid biosynthesis: Tryptophan	Regulatory leader peptide for trp operon	Null	b1265
ivbL	None	ilvB operon leader peptide	Leader; Amino acid biosynthesis: Isoleucine, Valine	ilvB operon leader peptide	Null	b3672
tnaC	tnaL	tryptophanase leader peptide	Leader; Degradation of small molecules: Amino acids	Regulatory leader peptide for tna operon	Null	b3707
thrL	None	thr operon leader peptide	Leader; Amino acid biosynthesis: Threonine	Regulatory leader peptide for thrABC operon	Null	b0001
pyrL	None	pyrBI operon leader peptide	Leader; Pyrimidine ribonucleotide biosynthesis	pyrBI operon regulatory leader peptide	Null	b4246
leuL	leuLP	leu operon leader peptide	Leader; Amino acid biosynthesis: Leucine	leu operon leader peptide	Null	b0075
mutL	None	methyl-directed mismatch repair protein	Enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	Methyl-directed mismatch repair; matchmaker protein; weak DNA-stimulated ATPase	MutL DNA-binding is required for methyl-directed mismatch repair (Robertson, 2006). The ATPase activity of MutL is essential for mismatch repair (Ban, 1998; Ban, 1999; Spampinato, 2000; Robertson, 2006). MutL binds UvrD, stimulates UvrD unwinding activity and is required for UvrD loading onto DNA (Hall, 1998; Yamaguchi, 1998; Mechanic, 2000). MutL stimulates MutS and Vsr binding to mismatched DNA (Drotschmann, 1998). 6/82 MutL peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed (Maillet, 2007).	b4170
hyfB	yffF	hydrogenase 4, membrane subunit	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Putative hydrogenase 4 component B; membrane protein of Hyf electron transfer complex of FHL system	Null	b2482
phnE'	None	defective phosphonate ABC transporter permease	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Anions	Pseudogene reconstruction, phosphonate ABC transporter permease; phosphonate catabolism	PhnCDE is a phosphonate ABC transporter; the phnE' pseudogene is defective in K-12; phosphonate utilization is cryptic in K-12; phnE has an 8 bp duplication (GGCGTGCT) at codon 139, causing a frameshift and a shortened protein. PhnE also transports some synthetic organophosphates. ABC transporter family.	b4104
fabZ	sabA, sefA, sfhC, yaeA	(3R)-hydroxymyristol acyl carrier protein dehydratase	Enzyme; Fatty acid and phosphatidic acid biosynthesis	3R-hydroxymyristoyl acyl carrier protein (ACP) dehydratase	FabZ is a member of the HotDog superfamily of thioesterases and dehydratases (Pfam CL0050, PF07977). Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004).	b0180
glrR	qseF, yfhA	response regulator regulating glmY sRNA in two-component system with sensor protein GlrK	Putative regulator; Not classified	Response regulator regulating glmY sRNA; cognate histidine sensor kinase is GlrK(QseE)	Phosphorylated GlrR(QseF,YfhA) binds the glmY promoter and activates a sigma-54 (RpoN) promoter that overlaps the sigma-70 (RpoD) promoter (Reichenbach, 2009). Also characterized in an EPEC strain, QseC activates transcription of qseEGF(glrK-yfhG-glrR) in response to the autoinducer-3 (AI-3)/epinephrine/norepinephrine interkingdom signaling system (Reading, 2007). GlrK(QseE,YfhK) phosphorylates GlrR(QseF,YfhA) and has autokinase activity in vitro; GlrR(QseF,YfhA) is also phosphorylated in vitro by non-cognate sensors UhpB, BaeS, EnvZ and RstB (Yamamoto, 2005). QseEF(GlrKR) responds directly to epinephrine, sulfate and phosphate (Reading, 2009).	b2554
argE	Arg4, argA	acetylornithine deacetylase	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Arginine	Acetylornithine deacetylase	Null	b3957
ygbA	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Function unknown	NsrR nitrite-sensing regulon.	b2732
mak	yajF	manno(fructo)kinase	Putative regulator; Not classified	Cryptic manno(fructo)kinase	Mak also has low level glucokinase activity; fructose is a much better substrate than glucose in vitro. The same (probable) promoter-up mutation was isolated as rescuing both fructose (Sproul, 2001) and glucose kinase (Miller, 2005) deficiences. The original interpretation of the mak-up mutation as being in the mak coding region has been clarified by identifying the GTG initiation codon at the previous codon 47, placing the mak-up mutation in the putative promoter region. The unpublished protein sequencing is noted in Miller (2005) and the actual protein sequence data obtained (MRIGIDLGGTKTEVIALGDAGEQLY) was provided as a personal communication from Brian Miller (March, 2006).	b0394
preA	yeiA	dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase, NADH-dependent, subunit C	Enzyme; pyrimidine metabolism	Dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase, NADH-dependent, subunit C; pyrimidine metabolism; required for swarming phenotype	EcDPD (PreAT) physiologically converts uracil into 5,6-dihydrouracil (DHU) (Mihara, 2008; Hidese, 2011). HT_Cmplx37_Cyt: (PreA)YeiA+(PreT)YeiT.	b2147
yeiB	None	DUF418 family putative inner membrane protein	Null	Predicted inner membrane protein, function unknown	The yeiG-folEyeiB divergent operon promoter region binds ArcA and folE-yeiB expression is repressed by ArcA (Federowicz. 2014).	b2152
loiP	yggG	Phe-Phe periplasmic metalloprotease, OM lipoprotein; low salt-inducible; Era-binding heat shock protein	Enzyme; Degradation of proteins, peptides, glycopeptides	Phe-Phe periplasmic metalloprotease, OM lipoprotein; low salt-inducible; heat shock protein that binds Era	LoiP(YggG) is a low salt inducble, OM-attached periplasmic metalloprotease that has an intramolecular disulphide bind required for full stability and enzymatic activity of LoiP(yggG); LoiP(YggG) interacts with the periplasmic predicted metalloprotease BepA(YfgC), which is required for the OM attachment of LoiP(YggG) (Lütticke, 2012). YggG of K. pneumoniae is a zinc-dependent metalloprotease (Kuan, 2011). The heat shock protein LoiP(YggG) binds Era and mitigates the deleterious effect of overproducing mutant Era-1 protein (Huang, 2007). htpX, loiP(yggG), bepA(yfgC) and ycaL are paralogs. A gene disruption of loiP(yggG) does not cause growth defect (unpublished data, Y. Akiyama, cited in Sakoh, 2005). The first 18 aa of LoiP are predicted to be a type II signal peptide. M48 protease family.	b2936
yghA	None	putative oxidoreductase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Predicted oxidoreductase, COG1028 family; function unknown	The yghA-yqhA divergent operon promoter region binds FNR and yghA expression is repressed by FNR (Federowicz, 2014). 3/34 YghA peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed (Maillet, 2007).	b3003
lolB	hemM, ychC	lipoprotein localization factor	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Heme, porphyrin	OM lipoprotein required for localization of lipoproteins	The first 21 aa of LolB are a type II signal peptide.	b1209
ispE	ipk, ychB	4-diphosphocytidyl-2-C-methylerythritol kinase	Null	4-diphosphocytidyl-2-C-methylerythritol kinase; isopentenyl phosphate kinase; alternative nonmevalonate (DXP) pathway for terpenoid biosynthesis; essential gene	Null	b1208
wzzE	metNSt, wzz, yifC	Entobacterial Common Antigen (ECA) polysaccharide chain length modulation protein	Putative transport; Not classified	Enterobacterial common antigen ECA chain length determination; also involved in cyclic enterobacterial common antigen ECA(CYC) synthesis	Mutants have elevated OM vesiculation (McBroom, 2006).	b3785
radA	sms	DNA repair protein	Putative enzyme; Degradation of proteins, peptides, glycopeptides	Sensitivity to gamma and UV radiation	Null	b4389
dsbA	dsf, iarA, ppfA	periplasmic protein disulfide isomerase I	Enzyme; Proteins - translation and modification	Thiol:disulfide interchange protein, periplasmic; alkali-inducible	DsbA has a role in cytochrome C synthesis. PDB 1TI1 is derived from E. coli O157:H7 but is identical to the K-12 DsbA sequence.	b3860
yhdE	maf(B.s.)	dTTP/UTP pyrophosphatase; m(5)UTP/m(5)CTP/pseudo-UTP pyrophosphatase	Null	dTTP/UTP pyrophosphatase; m(5)UTP/m(5)CTP/pseudo-UTP pyrophosphatase; Maf-like protein	The pyrimidine nucleoside pyrophosphatase YhdE hydrolyzes dTTP and UTP in vitro and its overexpression (but not the the inactive YhdE D70A mutant protein) increases intracellular concentrations of dTMP and UMP ten-fold and two-fold, respectively; YhdE also hydrolyzes m(5) UTP, pseudo UTP and m(5) CTP in vitro although detection limits probably precluded in vivo detection of the products of these reactions; YhdE probably prevents misincorporation of modified nucleosides in vivo; overproduction of YhdE might be expected to inhibit DNA synthesis due to a reduction of TTP availability, possibly related to the Maf cell division-defective overexpression phenotype observed for YhdE orthologs (Tchigvintsev, 2013). YceF and YhdE are homologous to the B. subtilus Maf protein, a polar-localized, cell division-associated protein that inhibits septum formation when overproduced (Hamoen, 2011; Briley, 2011). The structure of the B. subtilus Maf has been determined; Maf binds two dUTP molecules in a cleft that may actually be a nucleic acid binding domain (Minasov, 2000). maf is mre-linked in B. subtilus and yhdE is downstream of mreBCD in E. coli and therefore yhdE is likely be the maf ortholog. 9/82 YhdE peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed (Maillet, 2007). otherPDB (B. subtilis): 1EX2. otherPDB (B. subtilis): 1EXC.	b3248
rng	adhR, cafA, yhdF	ribonuclease G	Structural component; Cell division	Endoribonuclease G involved in 16S rRNA processing; division and growth, overexpression forms minicells and chains with long axial structures	Null	b3247
ydfA	None	Qin prophage; DUF1391 family protein	Phage or Prophage Related	DUF1391 family protein, Qin prophage	ydfA is a DicA-repressed gene (Yun, 2012). ydaF(Rac) and ydfA(Qin) are homologous.	b1571
ydfB	None	Qin prophage; uncharacterized protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Expressed protein, function unknown, Qin prophage	Null	b1572
ydfC	None	Qin prophage; uncharacterized protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Uncharacterized protein, Qin prophage	ydfC was previously annotated as a truncated pseudogene Rz homolog in Qin/Kim, but a reassessment led to its restoration as an intact gene of unknown function. An Rz-equivalent Kim gene ydfP, downstream of arrQ, has been renamed as rzpQ.	b1573
ydfD	None	Qin prophage; DUF1482 family protein	Phage or Prophage Related	DUF1482 family protein, Qin prophage	Null	b1576
ydfE'	None	Qin prophage; pseudogene	Phage or Prophage Related	Pseudogene, N-terminal fragment, Qin prophage	Null	b1577
tatE	ybeC	TatABCE protein translocation system subunit	Null	Protein translocase, Sec-independent; mediates export of folded and ligand-bound proteins	Null	b0627
lipA	lip	lipoate synthase	Putative enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Lipoate	Lipoyl synthase, iron-sulfur protein; SAM-dependent chemistry	Radical SAM superfamily. The lipA gene is regulated by the PdhR transcription factor (Kaleta, 2010).	b0628
ydbA'	None	pseudogene, autotransporter homolog	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction, autotransporter homolog; interrupted by IS2D and IS30C; reported to be required for swarming phenotype	Two independent insertions, IS30C and IS2D, interrupt ydbA. The IS2D insertion is in codon 839 and made a 5 bp target site duplication AACCC. The IS30C insertion is in codon 856 and made a 2 bp target site duplication CT. The pre-insertion YdbA sequence has been reconstructed and is consistent with the sequence of a closely-related E. coli 53638 protein with this region intact (NCBI gi 75515008). The first 21 aa of YdbA are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. The 17 codons between the two insertions encode PELTYADSGAKIVNKGT and were overlooked in previous reconstructions.	b4492
ydbC	None	putative NAD(P)-binding oxidoreductase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Predicted oxidoreductase, NAD(P)-binding, function unknown	Although its in vivo biochemical activity is unknown, YdbC has Kemp eliminase activity towards the xenobiotic substrate 5-nitrobenzisoxazole in vitro, demonstrating catalytic promiscuity of a natural enzyme for an unnatural chemical reaction (Khersonsky, 2011).	b1406
ydbD	None	DUF2773 family methylglyoxal resistance protein	Null	DUF2773 family methylglyoxal resistance protein	YdbD is predicted to have a 24 aa type I signal peptide and is probably a periplasmic protein. An insertion in ydbD confers increased sensitivity to methylglyoxal and dihydroxyacetone in a gloA mutant background (Kim, 2007). YkiA and YdbD are paralogs. YcaP and YdbD are grouped into paralogous gene group 289 at EcoCyc but they are likely to be unrelated: YcaP is a predicted membrane protein and YdbD is not; YcaP family proteins are much smaller than YdbD family proteins and they belong to different superfamilies.	b1407
dusB	yhdG	tRNA-dihydrouridine synthase B	Enzyme; tRNA modification	tRNA-dihydrouridine synthase B	Null	b3260
yicR	radC	UPF0758 family protein	Phenotype; Not classified	UPF0758 family protein, function unknown	yicR was mistakenly thought to be allelic to radC102 (Lombardo, 2000). yicR is paralogous to cryptic prophage genes yfjY, ykfG, yeeS, although they lack the N-terminal helix-hairpin-helix (HhH) domain of YicR. CreBC regulon. yicR is predicted to have a CRP-S promoter co-regulated by both Crp and Sxy (Cameron, 2006).	b3638
rhaT	None	L-rhamnose:proton symporter	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	Rhamnose permease; L-rhamnose-H+ symporter, membrane protein	RhaT belongs to the EamA/RhaT transporter family, DMT superfamily.	b3907
purB	ade(h)	adenylosuccinate lyase	Enzyme; Purine ribonucleotide biosynthesis	Adenylosuccinate lyase, purine synthesis	HT_Cmplx33_Cyt: AcpP+PurB+SecA.	b1131
acuI	yhdH	putative acryloyl-CoA reductase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Putative acryloyl-CoA reductase	acuI(yhdH) mutants are hypersensitive to acrylate (100-fold) and 3-hydroxypropionate (10-fold); AcuI(YdhH) is proposed to have a role in endogenous and/or exogenous acrylate detoxification (Todd, 2012). The acuI gene of R. sphaeroides has been shown to be an acryloyl-CoA reductase yielding propionyl-CoA (Schneider, 2012). A mutation in the acuI gene of R. sphaeroides confers hypersensitivity to acrylate and results in a reduced rate of acrylate metabolism (Sullivan, 2011). E. coli acuI(yhdH), R. sphaeroides acuI, and six other MDR012 genes are all able to complement the acrylate hypersensitivity of an E. coli acuI(yhdH) mutant, indicating their functional equivalence (Todd, 2012). AcuI(YdhH) is a member of the medium chain reductase/dehydrogenase (MDR) family, MDR012 sub-family. 3/148 AcuI(YhdH) peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is not removed (Maillet, 2007).	b3253
malS	None	alpha-amylase	Enzyme; Degradation of polysaccharides	Alpha-amylase, periplasmic	MalT regulon.	b3571
fabD	tfpA	malonyl-CoA-[acyl-carrier-protein] transacylase	Enzyme; Fatty acid and phosphatidic acid biosynthesis	Malonyl-CoA-acyl carrier protein transacylase	Null	b1092
fabG	None	3-oxoacyl-[acyl-carrier-protein] reductase	Enzyme; Fatty acid and phosphatidic acid biosynthesis	Beta-ketoacyl-ACP reductase	FabG converts ethyl 4-chloroacetoacetate (ECAA) to ethyl ( S)-4-chloro-3-hydroxybutanoate (ECHB) in vitro. Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004).	b1093
galU	verA, ychD	glucose-1-phosphate uridylyltransferase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Glucose-1-P uridylyltransferase; also called UDP-glucose pyrophosphorylase	Null	b1236
nrdR	ribX, ybaD	Nrd regulon repressor	Null	Nrd regulon repressor	NrdR has been shown to regulate all three Nrd systems and to bind to the predicted NrdR binding sites (Torrents, 2007). NrdR is homologous to S. coelicolor NrdR (Borovok, 2004). NrdR binding sites have been predicted for the nrdAB, nrdDG, and nrdHIEF operons (Rodionova, 2005). This corresponds to putative TF Binding Site Cluster E581 for nrdD and nrdA (Qin, 2003). Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004). nrdR is the first gene in the putative nrdR-ribDE-nusB operon. NrdR is an ATP-cone domain protein.	b0413
ribD	ribG, ybaE	fused diaminohydroxyphosphoribosylaminopyrimidine deaminase and 5-amino-6-(5-phosphoribosylamino) uracil reductase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Riboflavin	Bifunctional enzyme for second and third steps in riboflavin biosynthesis; 2,5-diamino-6-ribosylamino-4(3H)-pyrimidinone 5'-phosphate deaminase; ribosyl reductase	Null	b0414
ribE	ribH, ybaF	riboflavin synthase beta chain	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Riboflavin	Lumazine (6,7-dimethyl-8-ribityllumazine) synthase; 60-mer capsid; penultimate step in the biosynthesis of riboflavin; binds RibC homotrimer	10/57 RibE(RibH) peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is not removed (Maillet, 2007).	b0415
ygfB	None	UPF0149 family protein	Null	UPF0149 family protein, function unknown	YecA and YgfB are both members of the UPF0149 family of unknown function. otherPDB (H. influenzae): 1IZM.	b2909
ubiH	acd, visB	2-octaprenyl-6-methoxyphenol hydroxylase, FAD/NAD(P)-binding	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Menaquinone, ubiquinone	2-octaprenyl-6-methoxyphenol hydroxylase; produces 2-octaprenyl-6-methoxy-1,4-benzoquinone	ubiI(visC), ubiH, ubiF and mhpA are paralogs.	b2907
acnA	acn	aconitate hydratase 1; aconitase A	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: TCA cycle	Aconitate hydratase 1; aconitase A, stationary phase induced; iron-sulfur cluster	AcnA is produced in the stationary growth phase, interconverting citrate and iso-citrate via cis-aconitate (Cunningham, 1997). During oxidative stress inactive AcnA apo-enzyme without iron sulphur clusters binds the acnA mRNA 3' UTR, stabilizes acnA mRNA and increases AcnA synthesis, thus mediating a post-transcriptional positive autoregulatory switch (Tang, 1999). acnA is negatively regulated by ryhB RNA as part of indirect positive regulation by Fur in response to iron availability (Masse, 2002).	b1276
codA	None	cytosine/isoguanine deaminase	Enzyme; Salvage of nucleosides and nucleotides	Cytosine/isoguanine deaminase	An isoguanine deaminase activity of E. coli B was first demonstrated in crude extracts (Friedman, 1951). Isoguanine was found to be a substrate for cytosine deaminase CodA, yielding xanthine as product; this identifies the enzyme solely responsible for isoguanine deaminase activity in K-12 60 years after this orphan enzyme activity was first reported in E. coli (Hitchcock, 2011). Isoguanine (2-oxo-adenine) is an oxidation product of adenine in DNA that is mutagenic to the cell but can be salvaged by CodA.	b0337
codB	None	cytosine transporter	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Nucleosides, purines, pyrimidines	Cytosine transport	Downregulated twofold by GSNO in defined medium (aerobic).	b0336
fdx	None	[2Fe-2S] ferredoxin	Carrier; Energy metabolism, carbon: Electron transport	Ferredoxin, an iron-sulfur protein; involved in assembly of other Fe-S clusters	The fdx gene is cotranscribed with hscBA and is cold inducible.	b2525
gabD	None	succinate-semialdehyde dehydrogenase I, NADP-dependent	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	Succinate semialdehyde dehydrogenase, NADP-dependent; SSADH; SSDH	Also known as succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase.	b2661
gabP	None	gamma-aminobutyrate transporter	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	GABA permease, membrane protein	Null	b2663
ribA	None	GTP cyclohydrolase II	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Riboflavin	GTP cyclohydrolase II, riboflavin biosynthesis	Null	b1277
upp	uraP	uracil phosphoribosyltransferase	Enzyme; Salvage of nucleosides and nucleotides	Uracil phosphoribosyltransferase	Null	b2498
ubiI	visC	2-octaprenylphenol hydroxylase, FAD-dependent	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Menaquinone, ubiquinone	2-octaprenylphenol hydroxylase, ubiquinone biosynthesis; FAD-dependent monooxygenase	UbiI(VisC) is the FAD-dependent monooxygenase required for the aerobic hydroxylation of 2-octaprenylphenol to 2-octaprenyl-6-hydroxy-phenol, the fourth step of ubiquinone biosynthesis (Chehade, 2013). A deletion of ubiI(visC) had no effect on photosensitivity or aerobic respiration (Nakahigashi, 1992). ubiI(visC), ubiH, ubiF and mhpA are paralogs. Probable false positive lipoprotein prediction, Cys not conserved.	b2906
ligB	yicF	DNA ligase, NAD(+)-dependent	Putative enzyme; Not classified	DNA ligase B, NAD(+)-dependent	Null	b3647
nadR	nadI, pnuA(S.t.)	trifunctional protein: nicotinamide mononucleotide adenylyltransferase, ribosylnicotinamide kinase, transcriptional repressor	Regulator; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Pyridine nucleotide	NMN adenylyltransferase/ribosylnicotinamide kinase/repressor; nicotinamide mononucleotide adenyltransferase; involved in transport of nicotinamide riboside (NR) by PnuC	NadR is a trifunctional protein involved in NAD/NMN transport, utilization and regulation. The N-terminal NadR domain encodes NMN adenylyltransferase that converts NMN to NAD. The central NadR domain encodes ribosylnicotinamide kinase which converts the PnuC substrate nicotinamide riboside (NR) to NMN as part of a proposed group translocation import process. The C-temrinal NadR domain encodes a DNA-binding transcriptional repressor regualting genes in the NadR regulon. pnuA alleles of Salmonella nadR are defective in MNM transport and utilization (Foster, 1979; Kinney, 1979; Foster, 1987; Foster, 1990).	b4390
endA	None	DNA-specific endonuclease I	Enzyme; Degradation of DNA	DNA-specific endonuclease I, periplasmic; inhibited by RNA; extensive DNA breakdown	The first 22 aa of EndA are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. 	b2945
lysP	cadR	lysine transporter	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	Lysine permease; lysine repressed	LysP transcription is regulated by Lrp and ArgP but LysP expression is unaffected by yeiE or lysR deletions (Ruiz, 2011). LysP acts as if it were a negative regulator of cadBA expression in the absence of lysine. The Salmonella LysP ortholog STM2200 has been purified and functionally characterized and is 94% identical to E. coli LysP (Kaur, 2014).	b2156
msyB	None	multicopy suppressor of secY and secA	Phenotype; Protein, peptide secretion	In multicopy restores growth and protein export functions of secY and secA mutants	Null	b1051
waaG	rfaG	UDP-glucose:(heptosyl)lipopolysaccharide alpha-1,3-glucosyltransferase; lipopolysaccharide core biosynthesis protein; lipopolysaccharide glucosyltransferase I	Enzyme; Macromolecule metabolism: Lipopolysaccharide	UDP-glucose:(heptosyl)LPS alpha-1,3-glucosyltransferase; LPS core biosynthesis protein; glucosyltransferase I	WaaG(RfaG) adds the first glucosyl group to the heptose region of the inner core of the core oligosaccharide of LPS (Creeger, 1979; Parker, 1992). Mutants have reduced OM vesiculation (McBroom, 2006).	b3631
waaP	rfaP	kinase that phosphorylates core heptose of lipopolysaccharide	Enzyme; Macromolecule metabolism: Lipopolysaccharide	Lipopolysaccharide kinase; LPS core biosynthesis; phosphorylation of core	Null	b3630
waaQ	rfaQ	lipopolysaccharide core biosynthesis protein	Enzyme; Macromolecule metabolism: Lipopolysaccharide	Glycosyltransferase needed for heptose region of LPS core	Null	b3632
ychE	None	UPF0056 family inner membrane protein	Putative transport; Not classified	UPF0056 family inner membrane protein	marC, ychE and yhgN are paralogs (Pfam PF01914).	b1242
mdtG	yceE	putative drug efflux system protein	Putative transport; Not classified	Multidrug resistance efflux transporter; overexpression resistance to fosfomycin and deoxycholate	Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS). 	b1053
mnmA	asuE, trmU, ycfB	tRNA(Gln,Lys,Glu) U34 2-thiouridylase	Enzyme; tRNA modification	tRNA(Gln,Lys,Glu) U34 2-thiouridylase; first step in mnm(5)-s(2)U34-tRNA synthesis; TusE binding partner; antisuppressor	Sulfur may be donated to tRNA U34 from TusD-activated MnmA or from TusD directly. Arigoni(1998) reported that mnmA(ycfB) is an essential gene, however Dassain(1999) and Kambampati(2003) both found mnmA(ycfB) deletion mutants to grow slowly. MnmA was originally thought to be a methyltransferase and was named TrmU.	b1133
hflD	hslZ, ycfC	putative lysogenization regulator	Null	Downregulates lambda lysogenization; interacts with cII protein; first gene in purB operon; peripheral membrane protein	hflD is a non-essential gene.	b1132
fliE	flaAI, flaN	flagellar basal-body component	Structural component; Surface structures	Flagellar synthesis; basal body component	Null	b1937
fliF	flaAII.1, flaBI	flagellar basal-body MS-ring and collar protein	Structural component; Surface structures	Flagellar basal body M-ring protein	Null	b1938
yidD	None	membrane protein insertion efficiency factor, UPF0161 family inner membrane protein	Membrane; Inner membrane	Membrane protein insertion efficiency factor, inner membrane protein	YidD has been localized to the inner membrane and shown to be required for optimal AtpE, CyoA and M13 P2 protein membrane insertion, which also require YidC (Yu, 2011). A small peptide corresponding to the translation of an ORF antisense to the rnpA-yidD overlap was detected in a shotgun MS experiment (Krug, 2013). UPF0161 family, DUF37 domain.	b4557
waaS	rfaS	lipopolysaccharide rhamnose:KdoIII transferase; lipopolysaccharide core biosynthesis protein	Enzyme; Macromolecule metabolism: Lipopolysaccharide	Lipopolysaccharide rhamnose:KdoIII transferase; required for the addition of rhamnose to KdoIII in LPS to complete Kdo(3)Rha; LPS core biosynthesis	Kdo is 3-deoxy-?-d-manno-oct-2-ulosonic acid.	b3629
waaB	lps, phx*, rfaB, syn*	lipopolysaccharide 1,6-galactosyltransferase; UDP-D-galactose:(glucosyl)lipopolysaccharide-1,6-D-galactosyltransferase	Enzyme; Surface polysaccharides & antigens	Lipopolysaccharide 1,6-galactosyltransferase; UDP-D-galactose:(glucosyl)lipopolysaccharide-1,6-D-galactosyltransferase	Null	b3628
waaO	rfaI(S.t.), rfaM, waaI(S.t.)	UDP-D-galactose:(glucosyl)lipopolysaccharide-alpha-1,3-D-galactosyltransferase	Enzyme; Surface polysaccharides & antigens	Lipopolysaccharide 1,3-glucosyltransferase; UDP-D-galactose:(glucosyl)LPS-1,3-D-galactosyltransferase; glucosyltransferase II	The gene for UDP-glucose:(glucosyl)LPS alpha-1,3-glucosyltransferase (glucosyltransferase II) from E. coli K-12 was first named as rfaM before it was sequenced (Creeger, 1979). waaO was earlier renamed as rfaI after rfaI in Salmonella typhimurium because of sequence homology and because the Salmonella rfaI gene complemented an E. coli rfaM mutant, although the authors were aware that the E. coli K-12 glucosyltransferase II has a different substrate specificity than the Salmonella typhimurium glucosyltransferase II (Pradel, 1992). The rfaI gene was renamed as waaI as part of a proposed systematic nomenclature revision (Reeves, 1996). Finally the genes for the distinctive glucosyltransferase II enzymes from E. coli K-12 and Salmonella typhimurium were assigned separate names: waaI was retained as the gene for the Salmonella-specific glucosyltransferase II enzyme UDP-galactose:(glucosyl)LPS alpha-1,3-glucosyltransferase and waaO was proposed as the gene for the K-12-specific glucosyltransferase II (Heinrichs, 1998).	b3627
waaR	rfaJ(S.t.), rfaN, waaJ(S.t.)	lipopolysaccharide 1,2-glucosyltransferase; UDP-glucose:(glucosyl)LPS alpha-1,2-glucosyltransferase	Enzyme; Surface polysaccharides & antigens	Lipopolysaccharide 1,2-glucosyltransferase; UDP-glucose:(glucosyl)LPS alpha-1,2-glucosyltransferase; glucosyltransferase III	The gene for UDP-glucose:(glucosyl)LPS alpha-1,2-glucosyltransferase (glucosyltransferase III) from E. coli K-12 was first named as rfaN before it was sequenced (Austin, 1990). waaR was earlier renamed as rfaJ after rfaJ in Salmonella typhimurium because of sequence homology and because the Salmonella rfaJ gene complemented an E. coli rfaN mutant, although the authors were aware that the E. coli K-12 glucosyltransferase III has a different substrate specificity than the Salmonella typhimurium glucosyltransferase III (Pradel, 1992). The rfaJ gene was renamed as waaJ as part of a proposed systematic nomenclature revision (Reeves, 1996). Finally the genes for the distinctive glucosyltransferase III enzymes from E. coli K-12 and Salmonella typhimurium were assigned separate names: waaJ was retained as the gene for the Salmonella-specific glucosyltransferase III enzyme UDP-glucose:(galactosyl)LPS alpha-1,2-glucosyltransferase and waaR was proposed as the gene for the K-12-specific glucosyltransferase III (Heinrichs, 1998).	b3626
emrA	None	multidrug efflux system	Transport; Drug/analog sensitivity	EmrAB-TolC multidrug resistance pump; periplasmic membrane fusion component, signal anchor; energy-dependent efflux of octane, thiolactomycin and the uncouplers DNP, CCCP, and FCCP	Null	b2685
fliA	flaD, rpoF	RNA polymerase, sigma 28 (sigma F) factor	Factor; Surface structures	Transcription factor sigma 28 for class III flagellar operons	Null	b1922
fliZ	yedH	RpoS antagonist; putative regulator of FliA activity	Structural component; Unknown	DNA-binding RpoS antagonist; transiently inhibits RpoS in post-exponential phase; timing factor allowing motility to continue for a while during starvation; not required for normal motility	FliZ acts by binding DNA at RpoS -10 sites and elsewhere (Pesavento, 2012). FliZ antagonizes Crl activation of a subset of RpoS-dependent promoters, without changing RpoS levels, and thus resembles an anti-sigma factor at Crl-stimulated RpoS promoters (Pesavento, 2008). FliZ may also regulate FliA (sigma 28). The motility defect of yhjH mutations is suppressed by multicopy yfgF and by mutations in ycgR, fliZ, yfiR, yegE, crfC(yjdA), and yjcZ (Girgis, 2007). Pfam PF02899 Integrase_SAM-like_N_phage.	b1921
dinG	rarB	ATP-dependent DNA helicase	Putative enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	ATP-dependent DNA helicase; putative repair and recombination enzyme, monomeric	DinG contains a [4Fe-4S] cluster required for helicase activity (Ren, 2009). LexA regulon.	b0799
murA	mrbA, murZ	UDP-N-acetylglucosamine 1-carboxyvinyltransferase	Enzyme; Murein sacculus, peptidoglycan	UDP-N-acetylglucosamine enoylpyruvyl transferase; fosfomycin resistance	murA is an essential gene.	b3189
gspO	hofD, hopD, hopO, yheC	bifunctional prepilin leader peptidase/ methylase	Enzyme; Degradation of proteins, peptides, glyco	Prepilin peptidase in H-NS-silenced gsp divergon; type II protein secretion; cloned gsp divergon secretes ChiA	GspG is processed by GspO when both are expressed. gspO complements a pulO mutation for pullanase secretion in a K-12 strain with the Klebsiella pul operon. GspO cleaves PilE (N. gonorrhoeae) and PulG (K.oxytoca). A divergon is a regulon comprised of two adjacent divergent operons or genes.	b3335
bax	None	putative glucosaminidase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Predicted glucosaminidase, function unknown	Bax has a mannosyl-glycoprotein endo-beta-N-acetylglucosaminidase (PF01832, glycoside hydrolase family 73) FlgJ-like C-terminal domain and an N-terminal domain of unknown function.	b3570
asmA	yegA	suppressor of OmpF assembly mutants; putative outer membrane protein assembly factor; inner membrane-anchored periplasmic protein	Phenotype; Outer membrane constituents	Suppressor of OmpF assembly mutants; inner membrane-anchored periplasmic protein; putative outer membrane protein assembly factor; required for swarming phenotype	Protein fractionation indicates that AsmA is associated with the inner membrane (Deng, 1996). SignalP and TMHMM indicate a single N-terminal transmembrane segment of AsmA may serve as a signal anchor. Thus AsmA is predicted to be mostly periplasmic, consistent with its role in outer membrane assembly of OmpF. Although no association of AsmA with the OM was detected, AsmA superfamily members YhjG and YicH (but not AsmA itself) were predicted to be beta-barrel proteins indicating that the inner membrane-anchored AsmA family proteins may also insert into the outer membrane, consistent with their putative role in OM protein assembly and OM maintenance (Zhai, 2009).	b2064
gluQ	yadB	glutamyl-Q tRNA(Asp) synthetase	Putative enzyme; Aminoacyl tRNA synthetases, tRNA modification	Glutamyl-queuosine tRNA(Asp) synthase	A downstream start site at M10 is also possible; both starts have been used to overproduce active protein (Dubois, 2004; Campanacci, 2004).	b0144
amiB	yjeD	N-acetylmuramoyl-l-alanine amidase II	Enzyme; Murein sacculus, peptidoglycan	N-acetylmuramyl-L-alanine amidase, periplasmic; role in septal cleavage during cell division; overexpression causes lysis, osmotic hypersensitivity; activated by EnvC	EnvC activates AmiA- and AmiB-mediated in vitro murein cleavage; cell lysis induced by EnvC overproduction requires expression of amiA or amiB (Uehara, 2010). In amiABC triple mutants, thickened dark bands termed septal peptidoglycan (SP) rings appear at division sites, representing a cell division structure that accumulates when septal synthesis and hydrolysis by the AmiABC amidases are uncoupled (Priyadarshini, 2007). A mutant lacking five murein hydrolases (amiABCmltCD=MHD90) has a delayed lysis phenotype after beta-lactam treatment (Heidrich, 2002). The first 22 aa of AmiB are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b4169
bglH	yieC	carbohydrate-specific outer membrane porin, cryptic	Putative membrane; Not classified	Outer membrane beta-glucoside porin, cryptic; lamB paralog	This carbohydrate-specific porin preferentially binds arbutin, salicin and cellobiose. bglH is part of the cryptic bglGFBH operon. The first 25 aa of BglH are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b3720
rob	cbpB, robA	right oriC-binding transcriptional activator, AraC family	Factor; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	Right oriC-binding transcriptional activator, AraC family	Rob binds to right border of the oriC origin of chromsome replication.	b4396
barA	airS(S.t.), gacC	hybrid sensory histidine kinase, in two-component regulatory system with UvrY	Enzyme; Global regulatory functions	Sensor histidine protein kinase, pleiotropic; controls the expresion of csrB/C sRNAs; works in concert with UvrY response regulator	BarA has both sensory kinase and response regulator domains. BarA is required for catalase (KatE) expression and resistance to hydrogen peroxide, through rpoS regulation.	b2786
menB	None	dihydroxynaphthoic acid synthetase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Menaquinone, ubiquinone	1,4-Dihydroxy-2-naphthoyl-CoA (DHNA-CoA) synthase; menaquinone biosynthesis	E. coli MenB is a type I enzyme that requires bicarbonate as a cofactor and contains a conserved glycine at the bicarbonate binding site (Jiang, 2010). The CoA moiety of the MenB product DHNA-CoA is hydrolyzed by MenI(YdiI) (Chen, 2013).	b2262
ubiC	sdgG?	chorismate--pyruvate lyase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Menaquinone, ubiquinone	Chorismate--pyruvate lyase	Null	b4039
ubiA	cyr, sdgG?	p-hydroxybenzoate octaprenyltransferase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Menaquinone, ubiquinone	4-Hydroxybenzoate polyprenyltransferase	Null	b4040
pgpC	yfhB	phosphatidylglycerophosphatase C, membrane bound	Enzyme; Macromolecule synthesis, modification: Phospholipids	Phosphatidylglycerophosphatase C, membrane bound	A pgpA pgpB mutant is viable and still makes phosphatidylglycerol; a pgpABC triple mutant is non-viable (Lu, 2010).	b2560
tadA	yfhC	tRNA-specific adenosine deaminase	Enzyme; tRNA modification	A34-tRNA adenosine deaminase; point mutation confers resistance to HokC(Gef)-mediated cell killing; essential gene; homodimeric	Previously reported non-essential nature was mistakenly based on an insertion that removed the last 17 aa, but the truncated enzyme is active. Three possible start sites annotated in various orthologs: -11, +1, and +12; alignment results ambiguous; +1 chosen due to best RBS.	b2559
mltF	yfhD	membrane-bound lytic transglycosylase F, murein hydrolase	Enzyme; Transporter; Not classified	Membrane-bound lytic transglycosylase F, murein hydrolase	MltF is an exolytic transglycosylase that can degrade non-crosslinked murein chains, and MltF is the least active of all seven lytic transglycosylases (Lee, 2013). The N-terminus (22-273) is homologous to ABC-type periplasmic binding proteins; the C-terminus (294-387) encodes the MltF function. Rob regulon. The first 21 aa of MltF are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. MltF is a lytic transglycosylase and apparently can compensate for the loss of the other six other lytic transglycosylases because mltF cannot be knocked out in strain MHD79 which lacks slt and mltA-E (Scheurwater, 2008). The function of the N-terminal domain is unknown, but it appears to modulate the MltF activity to be like hen lysozyme in that murein hydrolysis has linear time dependence, unlike the other MltA-E, which display an initial burst of activity then slow down (Scheurwater, 2008). MltF is attached to the inner leaflet of the outer membrane (Scheurwater, 2008).	b2558
folK	None	2-amino-4-hydroxy-6-hydroxymethyldihyropteridine pyrophosphokinase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Folic acid	6-Hydroxymethyl-7,8-dihydropterin pyrophosphokinase; monomeric	HPPK active center is formed once both substrates, ATP and HP, are bound and this assembly results in confirmational changes primarily in catalytic loops 1-3; catalytic loop 3 moves in the opposite direction upon binding of the nucleotide; catalytic loop 3 is involved in ternary complex stabilization and is necessary for catalysis.	b0142
folE	None	GTP cyclohydrolase I	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Folic acid	GTP cyclohydrolase I	Although a folE null mutant could not be made by Baba (2006), leading to its inclusion in the set of 303 essential genes, Klaus (2005) were able to construct a deletion mutation in folE. It requires LB+ thymidine and grows poorly, explaining the Baba negative result. Thus, folE is not an essential gene. FolE is the first enzyme of pre-Q(0) biosynthesis (Phillips, 2008). The yeiG-folEyeiB divergent operon promoter region binds ArcA and folE-yeiB expression is repressed by ArcA (Federowicz. 2014).	b2153
ftsP	sufI, sui, ygiJ(S.t.)	septal ring component that protects the divisome from stress; multicopy suppressor of ftsI(Ts)	Phenotype; Not classified	Septal ring component that protects the divisome from stress; multicopy suppressor of ftsI(Ts)	SufI localizes to the septal ring in the dividing cell (Tarry (2009). Verified Tat substrate: SufI has a Tat/Sec (Class II) 27 aa signal peptide (Tullman-Ercek, 2007). Overproduction of SufI titrates out the Tat translocon and mimics a tatC mutation. Multicopper oxidase homolog.	b3017
plsC	parF	1-acyl-sn-glycerol-3-phosphate acyltransferase	Enzyme; Macromolecule synthesis, modification: Phospholipids	1-Acyl-n-glycerol-3-phosphate acyltransferase; affects partitioning	Null	b3018
sufA	ydiC	Fe-S cluster assembly protein	Null	Scaffold protein for assembly of iron-sulfur clusters; facilitates delivery to target proteins; Fe-S transfer protein	Either IscA or SufA are required for the proper assembly of 4Fe-4S clusters but not 2Fe-2S clusters (Tan, 2009). iscA, sufA, and erpA are paralogs; nfuA is a possible HT gene with an N-terminal domain homologous to sufA and an additional thioredoxin-like C-terminal domain.	b1684
cbdB	appB, cyxB	cytochrome bd-II oxidase, subunit II	Putative enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Electron transport	Cytochrome bd-II oxidase subunit 2	Null	b0979
cbdA	appC, cyxA	cytochrome bd-II oxidase, subunit I	Putative enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Electron transport	Cytochrome bd-II oxidase subunit 1	cbdA is in the GadE regulon (Marbach, 2012). EvgAS regulon. HT_Cmplx29_Mem: CbdA+CydA.	b0978
glgS	scoR	motility and biofilm regulator	Putative enzyme; Macromolecule synthesis, modification: Polysaccharides - (cytoplasmic)	Motility and biofilm regulator	glgS described as a regulator of biofilm, motility and purine metabolism and referred to as scoR (Rahimpour, 2013). A glgS mutant has an elevated AMP level; AMP is a negative regulator of GlgC so the reduced glycogen in the glgS mutant is probably an indirect effect due to elevated AMP levels (Montero, 2009). GlgS does not affect transcription of the glg genes. RpoS regulon. cAMP regulon.	b3049
elbB	elb2, yhbL, yzzB	isoprenoid biosynthesis protein with amidotransferase-like domain	Putative factor; Not classified	Involved in isoprenoid biosynthesis; also known as sigma cross-reacting protein 27A	Variously called C56 peptidase family, PfpI/HchA peptidase/chaperone family, DJ-1/PARK7 superfamily. Sigma cross-reaction is unconfirmed.	b3209
ahpC	tpx	alkyl hydroperoxide reductase, C22 subunit	Enzyme; Detoxification	Alkyl hydroperoxide reductase, subunit C; reduced by the AhpF subunit	AhpCF protects aerobic, phosphate-starved cells from oxidative damage. Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004).	b0605
ahpF	None	alkyl hydroperoxide reductase, F52a subunit, FAD/NAD(P)-binding	Enzyme; Detoxification	Alkyl hydroperoxide reductase, subunit F; NAD(P)H:peroxiredoxin oxidoreductase, reduces AhpC; contains one FAD/monomer	The native AhpF from Salmonella has been N-terminally sequenced (Jacobson et al, 1989), supporting the choice of this alternate initiation codon in E. coli by inference.	b0606
amyA	yedC	cytoplasmic alpha-amylase	Enzyme; Degradation of polysaccharides	Alpha-amylase, cytoplasmic	Null	b1927
fliS	None	flagellar protein potentiates polymerization	Regulator; Surface structures	Flagellar chaperone, inhibits premature FliC assembly; cytosolic	Flagellar regulon.	b1925
fliT	None	putative flagellar synthesis and assembly chaperone	Regulator; Surface structures	Flagellar synthesis, predicted chaperone, role unknown	Flagellar regulon.	b1926
uspA	None	universal stress global response regulator	Putative regulator; Adaptations, atypical conditions	Global regulatory gene for stress response; mutants are UV-S	The uspA-uspB divergent operon promoter region binds FNR and uspA expression is repressed by FNR (Federowicz, 2014). UspA is transcriptionally activated by ppGpp and repressed by FadR.	b3495
osmY	None	salt-inducible putative ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein	Phenotype; Osmotic adaptation	Putative ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein; osmotically and stationary phase inducible; mutant is slightly salt sensitive	Putative YehWXY-OsmF ABC transporter. RpoS regulon.	b4376
nhaB	None	sodium:proton antiporter	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Cations	Na+/H+ antiporter 2, weakly pH-dependent; helps regulate intracellular pH and extrude lithium	NhaB, but not NhaA, is inhibited by the diuretic drugs amiloride and harmaline. IT (Ion Transporter) superfamily (Prakash, 2003). ST(3) structural class based on hydropathy profile (Lolkema, 2003).	b1186
dsbB	dsbX, iarB, roxB, ycgA	oxidoreductase that catalyzes reoxidation of DsbA protein disulfide isomerase I	Enzyme; Surface structures	Disulfide oxidoreductase, membrane-spanning protein; oxidizes periplasmic DsbA; DTT-sensitive phenotype	Null	b1185
fabR	yijC	transcriptional repressor of fabA and fabB	Null	Transcriptional repressor of fabA and fabB	TetR family.	b3963
yijD	None	DUF1422 family inner membrane protein	Null	DUF1422 family inner membrane protein, function unknown	Null	b3964
ubiD	yigC, yigY	3-octaprenyl-4-hydroxybenzoate decarboxylase	Null	3-octaprenyl-4-hydroxybenzoate carboxylyase; ubiquinone biosynthesis, third step; UbiX isozyme	Null	b3843
hdeA	yhhC, yhiB	stress response protein acid-resistance protein	Null	Periplasmic chaperone of acid-denatured proteins; H-NS repressed	Overexpression causes abnormal biofilm architecture. Acid-inducible and important for acid survival. HdeA and HdeB are both involved in periplasmic protein solubilization at pH 3; HdeA is involved in periplasmic protein solubilization at pH 2 (Kern, 2006).	b3510
hdeB	yhhD, yhiC	acid-resistance protein	Null	Periplasmic chaperone of acid-denatured proteins; H-NS repressed	RpoS regulon.	b3509
yhiD	yhhE	putative Mg(2+) transport ATPase, inner membrane protein	Putative transport; Not classified	Predicted Mg(2+) transport ATPase, MgtC family, function unknown; inner membrane protein	EvgAS regulon. An insertion in yhiD causes a defect in the convergent dctR gene expression. Repressed during biofilm formation.	b3508
psiF	None	PsiF family protein	Phenotype; Central intermediary metabolism: Phosphorus compounds	Predicted exported protein, phosphate starvation inducible, function unknown	The first 21 aa of PsiF are predicted to be a type I signal peptide, folowed by two tandem PF07769 PsiF_repeat domains.	b0384
treC	olgH, treE	trehalose-6-P hydrolase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Trehalose-6-phosphate hydrolase, osmoprotectant	Null	b4239
ppx	None	exopolyphosphatase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Phosphorus compounds	Exopolyphosphatase; inhibited by pppGpp and ppGpp, also has guanosine pentaphosphatase activity	PDB structure from O157:H7 has identical sequence as K-12. Competitive ihibition of Ppx by pppGpp during amino acid (relA-dependent) and phosphate starvation (spoT-dependent) apparently causes a sharp increase in cellular polyphosphate (Kuroda, 1997).	b2502
ychF	engD, gtp1	catalase inhibitor protein; ATPase, K+-dependent, ribosome-associated	Enzyme; Not classified	Catalase inhibitor protein; ATPase, K+-dependent, ribosome-associated; monomeric	Overexpression of YchF causes hydrogen peroxide hypersensitivity probably due to direct binding and inhibition of the catalase-peroxidase KatG by YchF, dependent on the ATPase activity of YchF and regulated by the YchF phosphorylation state at Ser16; ychF transcription is repressed by OxyR (Wenk, 2012). ychF is in the pth operon and is an obgE paralog; pth transcript stability depends on ychF integrity. otherPDB (H. influenzae): 1JAL. H. influenzae YchF binds GTP and dsDNA. A ychF deletion is reported to form filaments at 42C by Dassain (1999). ychF null mutant forms small colonies. YchF has potassium-dependent ATPase activity and ATP-independent 50S and 30S ribosomal subunit binding activity (Tomar, 2011).	b1203
cydD	htrD	glutathione/cysteine ABC transporter export permease/ATPase	Transport; Not classified	Glutathione/cysteine ABC transporter permease/ATPase; exports cysteine to periplasm as required for cytochrome assembly	Glutathione transport is more efficient than cysteine transport (Pittmann, 2005). Exogenous glutathione or cysteine rescues the swarming motility defect and benzylpenicillin hypersensitivity of cydDC mutants (Pittmann, 2002; 2005). Translation start site verified by start codon mutagenesis (Cruz-Ramos, 2004).	b0887
ribC	ribE	riboflavin synthase, alpha subunit	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Riboflavin	Riboflavin synthase; homotrimer; associated with RibE 60-mer	RibC contains two homologous domains. 4/268 RibC(RIbE) peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is not removed (Maillet, 2007).	b1662
dadA	dadR	D-amino acid dehydrogenase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Amino acids	D-amino acid dehydrogenase	dadR is the name that was assigned to cis-acting regulatory mutations in the dadA promoter region.	b1189
dadX	alnB, dadB(S.t.), msuA?	alanine racemase, catabolic, PLP-binding	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Amino acids	Alanine racemase, catabolic, PLP-binding, homodimeric	DadX has a covalently PLP-modified K35 residue N6-(pyridoxal phosphate)lysine.	b1190
lpxK	ycaH	lipid A 4'kinase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Lipid A 4' kinase	Null	b0915
yjgA	None	ribosome-associated UPF0307 family protein	Phenotype; Not classified	Ribosome-associated UPF0307 family protein, function unknown	YjgA has been found to be associated with the ribosomal 50S subunit in sucrose gradients (Jiang, 2006).	b4234
glnD	None	uridylyltransferase	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Glutamine	Bifunctional uridylyltransferase/uridylyl-removing enzyme; (UTase/UR); controls uridylylation state and activity of PII(GlnB)	GlnD has both a uridylyltransferase and a uridylyl-removing activity. The only known substrates for GlnD are the two PII proteins GlnB and GlnK. In both cases GlnD covalently modifies residue Tyr51 in the T-loop of the substrate thereby controlling the ability of GlnB and GlnK to interact with their specific targets. The activity of GlnD is controlled by the intracellular glutamine availability. Glutamine inhibits the transferase action of GlnD and as a consequence GlnB and GlnK are deuridylylated in N-sufficient conditions. [Comment provided by EcoTeam member Mike Merrick, 11.16.06]	b0167
holA	None	DNA polymerase III, delta subunit	Enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	DNA polymerase III, delta subunit; part of the DnaX clamp loader complex; acts as a wrench to open the sliding clamp	Null	b0640
holC	None	DNA polymerase III, chi subunit	Enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	DNA polymerase III, chi subunit	Null	b4259
holD	None	DNA polymerase III, psi subunit	Enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	DNA polymerase, psi subunit, clamp loader complex subunit	Null	b4372
dps	pexB, vtm	Fe-binding and storage protein; stress-inducible DNA-binding protein	Regulator; Global regulatory functions	Stress-induced Fe-binding and storage protein; forms biocrystals with DNA; copper homeostatsis	dps is required for growth below 8C, which is enabled by transgenic Oleispira antarctica Cpn10/60. Dps confers starvation-induced resistance to H2O2.	b0812
nrdD	None	anaerobic ribonucleoside-triphosphate reductase	Enzyme; 2'-Deoxyribonucleotide metabolism	Ribonucleoside-triphosphate reductase; class III anaerobic ribonucleotide reductase	Activated NrdD is predicted to be cleaved by oxygen at the Gly681 radical, dropping the last 31 aa. Requires AdoMet for oxidation of the iron-sulfur center and glycine radical formation. FNR regulon. Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004).	b4238
dcd	dus, paxA	deoxycytidine triphosphate deaminase; dCTP deaminase	Enzyme; 2'-Deoxyribonucleotide metabolism	dCTP deaminase; deoxycytidine triphosphate deaminase; mutants suppress lethal dut mutants	Null	b2065
bcr	bicA, bicR, sur, suxA	bicyclomycin/cysteine/sulfonamide efflux transporter	Transport; Drug/analog sensitivity	Efflux transporter for bicyclomycin, cysteine and sulfonamides	EvgAS regulon. Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS).	b2182
cynR	None	transcriptional activator of cyn operon; autorepressor	Regulator; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	Transcriptional activator for the cyn operon; autorepressor	The CynR translation start site has been verified by start codon mutagenesis (Lamblin, 1993). LysR family.	b0338
inaA	yfaG	acid-inducible Kdo/WaaP family putative kinase	Phenotype; Adaptations, atypical conditions	Acid-inducible Kdo/WaaP family predicted kinase	Rob regulon. inaA is not in the SoxRS regulon.	b2237
waaU	rfaK, waaK(S.t.)	lipopolysaccharide core biosynthesis	Enzyme; Macromolecule metabolism: Lipopolysaccharide	Adds terminal GlcNac side branch to the lipopolysaccharide core prior to attachment of the O antigen; not the same as Salmonella rfaK	Null	b3623
waaL	rfaL	O-antigen ligase	Enzyme; Macromolecule metabolism: Lipopolysaccharide	LPS core biosynthesis; O-antigen ligase	Null	b3622
waaY	rfaY	lipopolysaccharide core biosynthesis protein	Enzyme; Macromolecule metabolism: Lipopolysaccharide	LPS core biosynthesis	Null	b3625
waaZ	rfaZ	lipopolysaccharide KdoIII transferase; lipopolysaccharide core biosynthesis protein	Enzyme; Macromolecule metabolism: Lipopolysaccharide	Lipopolysaccharide KdoIII:KdoII transferase; required for the addition of KdoIII to KdoII in LPS; LPS core biosynthesis	Kdo is 3-deoxy-alpha-D-manno-oct-2-ulosonic acid.	b3624
tktA	tkt	transketolase 1, thiamine triphosphate-binding	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Non-oxidative branch, pentose pathway	Transketolase A; binds Zn(II)	Mutations in tktA affect chromosomal supercoiling.	b2935
sthA	sth, udhA	pyridine nucleotide transhydrogenase, soluble	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Soluble pyridine nucleotide transhydrogenase	Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004).	b3962
yjaZ	htrC	stationary phase growth adaptation protein	Factor; Adaptations, atypical conditions	Required for competitive stationary phase growth adaptation; function unknown	YjaZ (HtrC) was mistakenly thought to be essential for growth at high temperature and under sigma 32 (heat shock) regulation, but has now been shown not to be required for growth at high temperature; the original htrC mutant strains were found to not have a yjaZ(htrC) mutation (Thacker, 2006).	b3989
roxA	ycfD	50S ribosomal protein L16 arginine hydroxylase; 2-oxoglutarate oxygenase	Enzyme; Proteins - translation and modification	50S ribosomal protein L16 Arg81 hydroxylase; ROX; 2-oxoglutarate oxygenase	RoxA(YcfD) has 2-oxoglutarate oxygenase activity in vitro and in cells functions as a 50S ribosomal protein L16 arginine hydroxylase selective for Arg81; roxA(ycfD) mutants lack L16 hydroxylation and expressing RoxA(YcfD) restores the modification; roxA(ycfD) mutants grow slowly (Ge, 2012). RoxA(YcfD) is a member of the cupin superfamily Pfam PF8007 and the COG family COG2850. ycfD has been renamed as roxA (personal communication, C.J. Schofield and M.L. Coleman). RoxA is comprised of a Cupin_4 domain (Pfam PF08007).	b1128
yfeC	None	DUF1323 family putative DNA-binding protein 	Null	Predicted DNA-binding protein, DUF1323 family	Null	b2398
yfeD	None	DUF1323 family putative DNA-binding protein 	Null	Predicted DNA-binding protein, DUF1323 family	YfeD has an N-terminal HTH domain of the MerR superfamily.	b2399
msrA	pms, pmsR	methionine sulfoxide reductase A	Enzyme; Proteins - translation and modification	Methionine sulfoxide reductase A; specific for S diastereoisomers	Null	b4219
marA	cfxB, inaR, nfxC, norB, soxQ	multiple antibiotic resistance transcriptional regulator	Regulator; Drug/analog sensitivity	Transcriptional activator for multiple antibiotic resistance; AraC family; resistance to tetracycline, chloramphenicol	Martin (2002) provide some evidence in support of the this alternative ATG start: native protein is slightly smaller than the engineered protein by Western blot. The spacing to the GAGG RBS is bad for the first ATG and excellent for the second ATG. MarA is unstable.	b1531
marR	cfxB, inaR, soxQ	transcriptional repressor of multiple antibiotic resistance	Regulator; Drug/analog sensitivity	Transcription repressor of multiple antibiotic resistance; copper-sensitive protein; resistance to tetracycline and chloramphenicol; dimeric	Rob regulon.	b1530
ahr	yjgB	broad specificity NADPH-dependent aldehyde reductase, Zn-containing	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Aldehyde reductase, NADPH-dependent, Zn-containing; AdhZ3; broad specificity	Ahr(YjgB) binds zinc (Sevcenco, 2011). The Salmonella ahr gene is regulated by RpoS (Ibanez-Ruiz, 2000).	b4269
plsX	None	putative phosphate acyltransferase	Phenotype; Macromolecule synthesis, modification: Phospholipids	Probable phosphate acyltransferase	PlsX is homologous to the S. pneumoniae phosphate acyltransferase PlsX (UniProtKB: Q97TA6) (Lu, 2006). S. pneumoniae PlsX and PlsY work together as a two-step glycerol-3-phosphate acylation, the first step in phosphatidic acid synthesis, an intermediate in phospholipid synthesis (Lu, 2006). PlsXY homologs are present in E. coli, but PlsXY cannot substitute for the single step reaction catalyzed by the essential PlsB even on plasmids, although S. pneumoniae plsXY can plasmid rescue E. coli plsB null mutants (Yoshimura, 2007). plsY(ygiH) and plsX are synthetic lethals and cannot be simultaneously deleted and plsB overexpression permits growth of the plsXY double mutant (Yoshimura, 2007). A plsB null mutation cannot be P1 transduced into a strain with a chromosomal plsX mutation containing a plsB Km missense mutant clone which does allow growth of a plsB null mutation in a plsX+ background (Yoshimura, 2007).	b1090
yceF	None	m(7)GTP pyrophosphatase	Null	m(7)GTP pyrophosphatase; Maf-like protein	The nucleoside pyrophosphatase YceF hydrolyzes m(7)GTP in vitro (Tchigvintsev, 2013). YceF and YhdE are homolgous to B. subtilus Maf protein, a nucleotide-binding polar-localized protein that inhibits septum formation in B. subtilis (Briley, 2011).	b1087
emrB	None	multidrug efflux system protein	Putative transport; Drug/analog sensitivity	EmrAB-TolC multidrug resistance pump; energy-dependent efflux of octane, thiolactomycin, and uncouplers DNP, CCCP, and FCCP; inner membrane-spanning translocase	Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS).	b2686
def	fms	peptide deformylase	Enzyme; Proteins - translation and modification	Peptide deformylase; N-formylmethionylaminoacyl-tRNA deformylase; PDF	The def gene is essential unless the fmt formylase gene is also inactivated. Fe(II) is the metal co-factor in vivo (Rajagopalan et al., J. Am. Chem. Soc., 119:12418, 1997). Def was originally thought to be a zinc enzyme.	b3287
prlC	opdA(S.t.)	oligopeptidase A	Enzyme; Degradation of proteins, peptides, glyco	Oligopeptidase A, zinc metalloprotease; involved in the degradation of cleaved signal peptides; suppressor allele of LamB signal sequence mutations; heat shock regulon; proteinase In, multifunctional protease	7/576 PrlC peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed (Maillet, 2007).	b3498
gcvT	None	aminomethyltransferase, tetrahydrofolate-dependent, subunit (T protein) of glycine cleavage complex	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	Aminomethyltransferase, tetrahydrofolate dependent; T-protein of the glycine cleavage system	Null	b2905
rpiA	ygfC	ribose 5-phosphate isomerase, constitutive	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Non-oxidative branch, pentose pathway	Ribose-5-phosphate isomerase A, alkali-inducible	Null	b2914
scpA	mcm, sbm, yliK	methylmalonyl-CoA mutase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Fatty acids	Methylmalonyl-CoA mutase, B12-dependent	Part of a four gene operon encoding enzymes converting succinate to propionate.	b2917
argK	meaB, scpK?, ygfD	membrane ATPase/protein kinase	Phenotype; Not classified	Required to convert succinate to propionate, Arg transport?; reported to have ATPase and protein kinase activity	The role of ArgK in arginine transport needs to be reexamined. Characterization of the ArgK ortholog MeaB strongly suggests that ArgK is actually involved in protecting Mcm from inactivation and that ArgK may bind to Mcm. MeaB and Mcm are fused in some organisms. MeaB of M. extorquens binds and hydrolyzes GTP. ArgK is a homolog of the human disease gene MMAA, implicated in methylmalonic aciduria. argK is part of a four gene operon encoding enzymes converting succinate to propionate. ATPase, but not protein kinase, activity is reportedly required for arginine transport. ArgK does not have predicted transmembrane segments typical of a membrane protein.	b2918
csrA	zfiA	pleiotropic regulatory protein for carbon source metabolism	Regulator; Global regulatory functions	Global regulator of carbon source metabolism; RNA binding protein	CsrA-mediated and ppGpp-mediated global controls are intertwined; it is proposed both that CsrA-mediated regulation is relieved during the stringent response and that the CsrA-mediated regulation fine-tunes the stringent response (Edwards, 2011). csrA is a conditionally essential gene; a csrA deletion mutant only grows on rich media if the glgCAP operon is disrupted; a csrA deletion mutant also grows on minimal media with pyruvate as the carbon source; the original csrA::kan insertion allele is interrupted at codon 51 but retains partial activity (Timmermans, 2009). CsrA translationally represses the GGDEF diguanylate cyclase enzymes DgcZ(YdeH) and YcdT, which are needed for normal motility (Jonas, 2008). Recombinant CsrA-His6 was N-terminally sequenced, but this does not Verify since translation start was forced at ATG: Met is not clipped: MLIL start. CsrA also postively regulates FlhCD post-translationally, and hence is required for motility. CsrA exerts reciprocal effects on glycolysis versus gluconeogenesis and glycogen biosynthesis. glgC mRNA-binding activity blocks GlgC translation.	b2696
acs	acsA, yfaC	acetyl-CoA synthetase	Enzyme; Fatty acid and phosphatidic acid biosynthesis	Acetyl CoA synthase, acetate-scavenging enzyme, improves carbon starvation survival	CRP-cAMP regulon. Acetyl CoA synthase Acs is activated by sirtuin homolog CobB-mediated deacetylation of K609 in Salmonella (Starai, 2002). Protein acetyltransferase Pat in Salmonella inhibits acetyl CoA synthase Acs by acetylating residue K609; the orthologous Pka(YfiQ) is assumed to have the same function in E. coli (Starai, 2004). CheY is acetylated at lysine residues 92 and 109 by acetyl-CoA synthase (Acs), mediating a change in the direction of flagellar rotation stimulated by acetate (Barak, 2001).	b4069
hdfR	apeR?, yifA, yifD	flhDC operon transcriptional repressor	Regulator; Not classified	Transcriptional regulator of the flhDC operon, hns-dependent; not allelic to pssR	LysR family.	b4480
yifE	None	UPF0438 family protein	Null	UPF0438 family protein, function unknown; expressed protein	Null	b3764
wecB	nfrC, rffE, yifF	UDP-N-acetyl glucosamine-2-epimerase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Sugar-nucleotide biosynthesis, conversions	UDP-GlcNAc-2-epimerase; needed for ECA (enterobacterial common antigen) synthesis	Null	b3786
wecC	rff, rffD	UDP-N-acetyl-D-mannosaminuronic acid dehydrogenase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Sugar-nucleotide biosynthesis, conversions	UDP-ManNAcA dehydrogenase; needed for ECA (enterobacterial common antigen) synthesis	2/54 RffD(WecC) peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed (Maillet, 2007).	b3787
rffG	rff	dTDP-glucose 4,6-dehydratase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Sugar-nucleotide biosynthesis, conversions	dTDP-glucose dehydratase; needed for ECA (enterobacterial common antigen) synthesis	Null	b3788
rffH	yifG	glucose-1-phosphate thymidylyltransferase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Sugar-nucleotide biosynthesis, conversions	Glucose-1-phosphate thymidylyltransferase; needed for ECA (enterobacterial common antigen) synthesis	Null	b3789
wecD	rff, rffC, yifH	TDP-fucosamine acetyltransferase	Null	TDP-fucosamine acetyltransferase; needed for ECA (enterobacterial common antigen) synthesis; chain elongation	GNAT acetyltransferase family. Structure is from strain CFT1073.	b3790
wecE	rff, rffA, yifI	TDP-4-oxo-6-deoxy-D-glucose transaminase	Null	Lipid III biosynthesis; needed for ECA synthesis	Null	b3791
wzyE	rffT	putative ECA polysaccharide chain elongation protein	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Sugar-nucleotide biosynthesis, conversions	Wzy protein involved in ECA polysaccharide chain elongation; involved in polymerization of the UDP-linked ECA trisaccharide repeat unit of cyclic enterobacterial common antigen ECA(CYC)	Mutants are blocked in ECA synthesis and accumulate Lipid III.	b3793
wecG	rff, rffM	UDP-N-acetyl-D-mannosaminuronic acid transferase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Sugar-nucleotide biosynthesis, conversions	UDP-ManNAcA transferase; needed for ECA (enterobacterial common antigen) synthesis	Null	b3794
yifK	None	putative APC family amino acid transporter	Putative transport; Not classified	Predicted APC family amino acid transporter	Null	b3795
narQ	None	sensory histidine kinase in two-component regulatory system with NarP	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Nitrate/nitrite sensor-transmitter protein; anaerobic respiratory path; cognate regulator is NarP; function redundant with narX	Null	b2469
yigE	None	DUF2233 family protein	Null	DUF2233 family protein, function unknown	Null	b4482
corA	None	magnesium/nickel/cobalt transporter	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Cations	Mg2+ (and other divalent metals) uptake transporter; constitutive; at high Mg(2+), also mediates efflux; mutants are resistant to Co2+, Mn2+, and Ni2+, insensitive to Ca2+	corA mutants are hypersensitivity to lactoperoxidase. otherPDB (T. maritima): 2BBH, 2BBJ.	b3816
yigF	None	DUF2628 family putative inner membrane protein	Null	DUF2628 family putative inner membrane protein; function unknown	The yigGF operon promoter region binds AcrA (Federowicz, 2014).	b3817
yigG	None	PRK11371 family inner membrane protein	Null	Required for swarming phenotype, function unknown; inner membrane protein	The yigGF operon promoter region binds AcrA (Federowicz, 2014).	b3818
rarD	yigH	putative chloramphenical resistance permease	Null	Chloramphenicol resistance	Null	b3819
yigI	None	4HBT thioesterase family protein	Null	4HBT family thioesterase, function unknown	The yigI promoter region binds ArcA and ArcA represses yigI expression (Federowicz, 2014).	b3820
rhtC	yigJ	threonine efflux pump	Null	Threonine efflux pump; overproduction confers resistance to elevated levels of exogenous L-threonine	RhtC is a LysE superfamily exporter.	b3823
rhtB	yigK	homoserine, homoserine lactone and S-methyl-methionine efflux pump	Null	Homoserine, homoserine lactone and S-methyl-methionine efflux pump; overproduction confers resistance to elevated levels of exogenous L-threonine and L-homoserine	RhtB is a LysE superfamily exporter.	b3824
yigL	None	pyridoxal phosphate phosphatase	Null	Pyridoxal phosphate phosphatase; physiological role unknown	In vitro substrates include pyridoxal phosphate (strong); 2-deoxyglucose-6-P and glucose-6-P (moderate); phosphoramides, purines and pyrimidines (weak), as demonstrated by Kuznetsova et al. (2005, 2006). 4/92 YigL peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is not removed (Maillet, 2007). HAD16 family.	b3826
yigM	None	putative inner membrane EamA-like transporter	Null	Predicted putative inner membrane EamA-like transporter, function unknown	YigM belongs to the EamA/RhaT transporter family (Pfam PF00892) in the DMT superfamily (Pfam CL0184).	b3827
rmuC	dinK, sosB, yigN	DNA recombination protein	Phenotype; Not classified	DNA recombination protein; mutants have elevated recombination at microhomologies	The RmuC family is a member of the PD-(D/E)XK superfamily of predicted nucleases related to type II restriction endonucleases and Holliday junction resolvases (Aravind, 2000). A predicted RmuC resolvase or other nuclease function is consistent with a role in recombination, however rmuC mutants have increased inversion recombination frequencies, suggesting that RmuC might act as as anti-recombinase; the rumC phenotype is expressed in a rumA background (Slupska, 2000). LexA regulon.	b3832
ubiE	menG(B.stearo.), menH(B.stearo.), yigO	bifunctional 2-octaprenyl-6-methoxy-1,4-benzoquinone methylase/ S-adenosylmethionine:2-DMK methyltransferase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Menaquinone, ubiquinone	Ubiquinone/menaquinone biosynthesis methyltransferase; SAM-dependent; (1) Ubiqinone synthesis, 2-octaprenyl-6-methoxy-1,4-benzoquinone methyltransferase; (2) Menaquinone synthesis, 2-demethylmenaquinone (DMK) methyltransferase	UbiE is the closest E. coli homolog to B. stearothermophilus MenG (MenH, SP O86169). ubiE mutants accumulate DMK, not MK. rraA (menG) does not encode a methyltransferase. Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004).	b3833
ubiJ	yigP	aerobic ubiquinone synthesis protein, SCP2 family protein	Putative factor; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers:, Ubiquinone	Aerobic ubiquinone synthesis protein, SCP2 family protein	Earlier results identifying an essential sRNA esrE in the ubiJ(yigP) gene could not be reproduced in Salmonella or E. coli; no Salmonella esrE sRNA was detectable by Northern blots or 5' RACE; the ubiJ(yigP) gene is not essential in E. coli and can be deleted; the ubiJ(yigP) deletion strain forms small colonies aerobically and has a reduced growth yield in liquid medium; ubiJ(yigP) is required for ubiquinone but not menaquinone biosynthesis aerobically, but is not required for anaerobic ubiquinone production; the aerobic growth defects of an E. coli ubiJ(yigP) deletion can be complemented by wildtype ubiJ on a plasmid and by a codon-scrambled version of ubiJ that makes the same UbiJ protein sequence, indicating that the growth defect is due to UbiJ protein synthesis, not the esrE sRNA, in contrast to earlier results; a frameshifted version of ubiJ(yigP) on a plasmid failed to complement the growth defect; the C-terminal 50 codons of ubiJ(yigP) are sufficient for complementation of the growth defect and ubiquinone synthesis defect associated with aerobic growth of the ubiJ(yigP) deletion strain; the biochemical functional of UbiJ is unknown but the authors propose that UbiJ could serve as a carrier of the isoprenoid hydrophobic tail prior to the action of monooxygenases and methyltransferases (Aussel, 2013). The 5' and 3' ends of a putative esrE sRNA were mapped within the ubiJ(yigP) gene; the authors reported that the growth defect associated with a (ubiJ)yigP deletion could be complemented with a minimal esrE gene; the authors reported frameshifts do not disrupt the ability of an esrE clone to complement, indicating an RNA not protein product is responsible for the complementation, but this result was late refuted; the 3' end of esrE corresponds to the stop codon of yigP; there is no obvious Rho-independent terminator at the end of esrE (Chen, 2012).	b3834
ubiB	aarF, yigQ, yigR, yigS	regulator of octaprenylphenol hydroxylation, ubiquinone synthesis; regulator of 2'-N-acetyltransferase; putative ABC1 family protein kinase	Putative enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Menaquinone, ubiquinone	Regulator of octaprenylphenol hydroxylation, ubiquinone synthesis; regulator of 2'-N-acetyltransferase; putative ABC1 family protein kinase	UbiI, not UbiB, is 2-octaprenylphenol hydroxylase; UbiB is a putative protein kinase regulator of UbiI activity (Chehade, 2013). fre was previously mis-identified as ubiB.	b3835
tatA	mttA1, yigT	TatABCE protein translocation system subunit	Null	Protein translocase, Sec-independent; mediates export of folded and ligand-bound proteins	Forms a complex with TatBC	b3836
tatC	mttB, yigU, yigV	TatABCE protein translocation system subunit	Null	Protein translocase, Sec-independent; mediates export of folded and ligand-bound proteins	TatC has been topology mapped using protein fusions. TatC forms a complex with TatAB. Mutants have elevated OM vesiculation (McBroom, 2006). OtherPDB (A.aeolicus): 4B4A.	b3839
tatD	mttC, yigW, yigX	quality control of Tat-exported FeS proteins; Mg-dependent cytoplasmic DNase	Null	Quality control of Tat-exported FeS proteins; Mg-dependent cytoplasmic DNase; mutant has no general Tat defect	False positive lipoprotein prediction, unprocessed, verified amino terminus.	b4483
yigZ	None	UPF0029 family protein	Null	Function unknown, UPF0029 family, IMPACT family; distantly related to elongation factors	Null	b3848
hemG	yihB	protoporphyrin oxidase, flavoprotein	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Heme, porphyrin	Protoporphyrinogen oxidase; neomycin sensitivity; flavodoxin-like	HemG catalyzes the menadione-dependent conversion of protoporphyrinogen IX to protoporphyrin IX (Boynton, 2009).	b3850
wzxE	wzx, yifJ	O-antigen translocase	Putative carrier; Not classified	O-antigen translocating flippase; involved in the cross-membrane translocation of the UDP-linked ECA trisaccharide repeat unit of cyclic enterobacterial common antigen ECA(CYC)	Null	b3792
pdxH	None	pyridoxine 5'-phosphate oxidase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Pyridoxine	Pyridoxine/pyridoxamine phosphate (PNP/PMP) oxidase; isoniazid resistance	Null	b1638
mliC	ydhA	inhibitor of c-type lysozyme, membrane-bound; putative lipoprotein	Null	Inhibitor of c-type lysozyme, membrane-bound; predicted lipoprotein, lipobox conserved	E. coli K-12 has three vertebrate lysozyme inhibitors, the two c-type (chicken) inhibitors membrane-bound MliC and periplamsic Ivy, and one g-type (goose) inhibitor PliG (Vanderkelen. 2010). MliC is membrane-bound, consistent with the prediction that it is a lipoprotein (Callewaert, 2008). mliC is in the Rcs regulon (Callewaert, 2009). A mliC(ydhA) mutant has no obvious phenotype, and mliC(ydhA) mRNA was not detected (Lam, 1992). The first 17 aa of MliC are predicted to be a type II signal peptide. The solution structure of an 82 aa C-terminal fragment (with a 20 aa N-tag added) was determined, and a disulfide bond between C37 and C102 was observed (precursor numbering) (Revington, 2006). The unlikely, originally annotated, start site at M28 was misinterpreted as the start of a mature MliC(YdhA) protein (Revington, 2006). The predicted lipoprotein nature of MliC has not been experimentally confirmed. SignalP predicts a possible type I signal cleavage after residue 22, but the LipoP prediction for a lipoprotein is much better.	b1639
csgA	agfA(S.t.)	curlin subunit, amyloid curli fibers, cryptic	Regulator; Surface structures	Curli subunit, major; CsgA curlin, cryptic	The csgBA operon is regulated by CsgD. RpoS regulon.	b1042
gadB	None	glutamate decarboxylase B, PLP-dependent	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	Glutamate decarboxylase B, vitamin B6-dependent; hexameric	RpoS regulon. EvgAS regulon. H-NS repressed. Repressed during biofilm formation. Induced by acid shock and salt stress. At low pH, cytoplasmic GadB is recruited to the membrane. GadB helps E. coli survive stomach acids.	b1493
dinF	None	oxidative stress resistance protein; putative MATE family efflux pump; UV and mitomycin C inducible protein	Factor; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	Oxidative stress resistance protein; predicted MATE family efflux pump; UV and mitomycin C inducible	Overexpression of DinF protects cells from bile salts and oxidative stress by hydrogen peroxide, predominantly in the absence of mutT; DinF decreases intracellular ROS and protein carbonylation (Rodríguez-Beltrán, 2012). LexA regulon.	b4044
qorA	hcz, hzc, qor	quinone oxidoreductase, NADPH-dependent	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Electron transport	Quinone oxidoreductase A, NADPH dependent	N-terminal sequencing of a novel E. coli mRNA-binding protein gives best match to Qor and may verify its start.	b4051
pabC	None	4-amino-4-deoxychorismate lyase component of para-aminobenzoate synthase multienzyme complex	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Folic acid	Sulfonamide resistance; aminodeoxychorismate lyase	Null	b1096
yceG	None	septation protein, ampicillin sensitivity	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Septation protein, ampicillin sensitivity	UPF0755 family. YceG is needed for normal septation; yceG mutants are more resistant to ampicillin, have septal defects and alleviate the growth defects associated with amiC, ampD and other murein hydrolases (Babu, 2011). YceG is mistakenly predicted to be a aminodeoxychorismate lyase, which is encoded by the adjacent pabC gene. YceG may have an uncleavable signal anchor. Overexpression causes abnormal biofilm architecture and increased crystal violet staining.	b1097
hdeD	yhiA	acid-resistance membrane protein	Null	Putative membrane transporter, H-NS repressed	EvgAS regulon. RpoS regulon. Six TM helices predicted.	b3511
prfH'	None	pseudogene, RF-1 domain family	Null	Pseudogene, protein release factor homolog	prfH encodes the last 166 aa of a predicted 204 aa protein. An intact allele is in O6 (Q8FKM9). The same deletion event apparently removed a 3' part of ykfJ and a 5' part of prfH, which are intact and adjacent in other E. coli genomes.	b0236
prmA	prm-1, yhdI	methyltransferase for 50S ribosomal subunit protein L11	Enzyme; Ribosomal proteins - synthesis, modification	50S subunit L11 protein lysine methyltransferase	RplK has three residues trimethylated by the non-essential PrmA methyltransferase forming a blocking N-terminal N,N,N-trimethylalanine at residue A2 and forming two N6,N6,N6-trimethyllysines at residues K4 and K40 (Chang, 1975; Lederer, 1977; Dognin, 1980; Jerez, 1980; Vanet, 1994; Arnold, 1999). 	b3259
yhdJ	ccrM	DNA adenine methyltransferase, SAM-dependent	Putative enzyme; Not classified	DNA adenine methyltransferase, SAM-dependent	In vitro DNA adenine methyltransferase activity has been demonstrated for YhdJ; overexpression of YhdJ leads to protection of chromosomal DNA from NsiI digestion, but DNA from wild type cells is not protected (Broadbent (2007). DNA from a DNA methyltransferase deficient strain (dam-, dcm-, EcoK-) does not react with anti-N6-methylA or anti-N4-methylC antibodies when YhdJ is expressed from the pBR322 Tet promoter; the yhdJ-containing pBR322 derivative was not resistant to a variety of restriction (personal communication: R. Vaisvila, S. Stickel and R.J. Roberts, unpublished results, April, 2006). The Kossykh (2004) report describing yhdJ as ccrM, an adenine methyltransferase, has been retracted.	b3262
yhbE	None	EamA family inner membrane putative transporter	Null	EamA family predicted transporter, inner membrane protein; function unknown	YhbE belongs to the EamA transporter family (PF00892, formerly DUF6), DMT superfamily, and is comprised of two tandem EamA domains.	b3184
holB	None	DNA polymerase III, delta prime subunit	Enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	DNA polymerase III, delta' subunit; part of the DnaX clamp loader complex, the stator protein	Null	b1099
adiA	adi	arginine decarboxylase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Amino acids	Arginine decarboxylase, acid-inducible; arginine-dependent acid resistance	AdiA is homologous to CadA, SpeC, and SpeF. AdiA is regulated by CysB and AdiY. The N-terminus of AdiA from E. coli B was verified (Sabo, 1974).	b4117
rcsF	None	putative outer membrane protein	Regulator; Surface polysaccharides & antigens	Lipoprotein that signals increased capsule synthesis; upstream of RcsCDB phoshorelay; overexpression confers mucoid phenotype and increases colanic acid capsule synthesis; restores colony formation of ftsZ84 mutants on low salt	Increased synthesis of RcsF is not needed for RcsC activation, implying that RcsF undergoes modification or conformational change in response to cell surface conditions that signal increased colanic acid synthesis. rcsF is in the MprA regulon (Marbach, 2012). The first 15 aa of RcsF are a type II signal peptide.	b0196
tsaA	trmO, yaeB	tRNA-Thr(GGU) m(6)t(6)A37 methyltransferase, SAM-dependent	Enzyme; tRNA modification	tRNA-Thr(GGU) m(6)t(6)A37 methyltransferase, SAM-dependent; TrmO	The tsaA gene was named and the tsaA1 mutation causing a defect in tRNA m(6)t(6)A37 methyltransferase activity was finely mapped by co-transduction experiments (Qian, 1998). tsaA is the structural gene for the tRNA m(6)t(6)A37 methytransferase, renamed as TrmO (Kimura, 2014). Published transduction mapping results were used to locate the tsaA1 mutation to yaeB, which encodes the only predicted methyltransferase near tsaA1 (K. Rudd, 2011, unpublished). The crystal structure of the TsaA(YaeB) ortholog AF0241 from A. fulgidus has a bound SAM molecule leading to the prediction that TsaA(YaeB) is a novel methyltransferase (Forouhar, 2007). The crystal structure of the TsaA(YaeB) ortholog RPA0152 from R. palustris has a bound SAM molecule (Chang, C., Evdokimova, E., Liu, F., Savchenko, A., Edwards, A., Joachimiak, A., unpublished). Threonine tRNA(GGU) 1 (ThrV) modified to t(6)A37 (ThrV) is also methylated to form m(6)t(6)A37 (Komine, 1992). Threonine tRNA(GGU) 3 (ThrT) modified to t(6)A37 is also methylated to form m(6)t(6)A37 (Clarke, 1974). TsaA(YaeB) is a member of the UPF0066 family. otherPDB(R.palustris): 3OKX. otherPDB(A.fulgidus): 2NV4. The m(6)t(6)A37 modified tRNA nucleotide may be derived from a labile cyclized m(6)ct(6)A37 during extraction (Miyauchi, 2013).	b0195
metQ	metD, yaeC	DL-methionine transporter subunit	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	Periplasmic methionine binding lipoprotein; methionine sulfoximine sensitivity	The first 22 aa of MetQ are a type II signal peptide.	b0197
holE	None	DNA polymerase III, theta subunit	Enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	DNA polymerase III, theta subunit	Null	b1842
ftsH	hflB, mrsC, std, tolZ	protease, ATP-dependent zinc-metallo	Enzyme; Degradation of proteins, peptides, glyco	ATP-dependent membrane protease, complexed with HflCK; regulates lysogeny; mutants are defective in cell growth, septum formation and phage lambda development; mutants rescued by divalent cations; binds Zn(II); hexameric	HtpX collaborates with FtsH to eliminate abnormal membrane proteins: an hflX ftsH double mutant is temperature sensitive for growth. FtsH degrades both cytoplasmic, e.g. phage lambda cII protein, and membrane, e.g. SecY, substrates.	b3178
rlmE	ftsJ, mrsF, rrmJ	23S rRNA U2552 2'-O-ribose methyltransferase, SAM-dependent	Enzyme; rRNA modification; phenotype; Cell division	23S rRNA U2552 2'-O-ribose methyltransferase, SAM-dependent; involved in cell division and growth; heat inducible; suppressed by cloned ObgE and Der	RlmM and RlmE(FtsJ) are paralogs of the Pfam PF01728 family.	b3179
sra	rpsV	stationary-phase-induced ribosome-associated protein	Structural component; Ribosomal proteins - synthesis, modification	SRA (stationary-phase-induced ribosome-associated) protein; Protein D; present in copy number/ribosome = 0.1 (exp) to 0.4 (stat); previously called 30S ribosomal subunit protein S22, RpsV	Null	b1480
ppk	None	polyphosphate kinase, component of RNA degradosome	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Phosphorus compounds	Polyphosphate kinase, reversible	Ppk can also serve as a nucleoside diphosphate kinase (Kuraoda, 1997).	b2501
mog	bisD, chlG, mogA, yaaG	molybdochelatase incorporating molybdenum into molybdopterin	Transport; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Molybdopterin	Molybdochelatase incorporating molybdenum into molybdopterin; chlorate resistance	Mog is homologous to gephyrin. HT_Cmplx36_Cyt: Mog+YniC.	b0009
satP	yaaH	succinate-acetate transporter	Null	Succinate-acetate transporter	Inner membrane protein, Grp1_Fun34_YaaH family.	b0010
yaaI	None	UPF0412 family protein	Null	UPF0412 family predicted periplasmic protein, function unknown	The transcription start point of yaaIW mRNA has been mapped at -32 relative to the yaaI start codon (Fellner, 2013). The first 23 aa of yaaI are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b0013
gltF	ossB	periplasmic protein	Regulator; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	Periplasmic protein, function unknown	A gltF mutant has no phenotype with respect to amino acid utilization or ammonium transport; previous suggestions that GltF has a role in nitrogen-regulated gene expression are now unlikely. Although the GltF protein was overproduced using foreign translation signals, the detection of a signal peptide cleavage verifies the mature protein N-terminus. The precursor was also sequenced and the initial Met (MF) is not cleaved. The yhcC-gltBDF divergent operon promoter region binds ArcA (Federowicz, 2014).	b3214
yhcA	None	putative periplasmic chaperone protein	Putative factor; Not classified	Required for swarming phenotype, function unknown; predicted periplasmic pilus chaperone	YhcA has Ig-like domains: pfam PF00345 aligns to N-terminal residues 21-136, and pfam PF02753 aligns to C-terminal residues 139-220. The first 19 aa of YhcA are a predicted type I signal peptide.	b3215
ycgB	None	SpoVR family stationary phase protein	Null	SpoVR family stationary phase protein, function unknown	ycgB is a stationary phase-induced gene tht is part of the RpoS regulon (Weber, 2005; Ito, 2008).	b1188
glpX	None	fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase II	Phenotype; Not classified	Fructose 1,6 bisphosphatase; induced by glycerol, in glpFKX operon, not required for growth on glycerol	Null	b3925
fpr	flxR	ferredoxin-NADP reductase; flavodoxin reductase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	Ferredoxin NADP reductase; FNR; flavodoxin reductase; anaerobic	A cloned fpr gene suppresses the phenotype of an mvrA mutation.	b3924
nikR	yhhG	transcriptional repressor, Ni-binding	Null	Nickel-responsive regulator of the nik operon; homodimer	NikR contains an ACT-like domain (Grant, 2006).	b3481
yhhH	None	putative NTF2 fold immunity protein for polymorphic toxin RhsB	Null	Putative NTF2 fold immunity protein for RhsB toxin	rhsB is predicted to encode a polymorphic toxin and the downstream gene yhhH is predicted to encode an immunity protein (Zhang, 2012). The overexpression of YhhH causes abnormal biofilm architecture (Tenorio, 2003). ybbC and yhhH are paralogs.	b3483
ybfA	None	DUF2517 family protein	Null	Predicted secreted DUF2517 family protein; ArcA-activated	ArcA activates ybfA gene transcription and represses the divergently transcribed kdp operon by binding to the same operator site (Federowicz, 2014). The first 21 aa of YbfA are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b0699
ybfB	None	putative membrane protein	Null	Predicted membrane protein, function unknown	YbfB is encoded by the gene immediately downstream of the predicted polymorphic toxin gene rhsC and therefore may be a novel immunity protein. YbfB has three predicted transmembrane helices.	b0702
ybfC	None	putative secreted protein	Null	Predicted secreted protein, function unknown	YbfC is encoded by the gene immediately downstream of the predicted polymorphic toxin pseudogene rhsO'(ybfO') and therefore may be a novel immunity protein. The first 19 aa of YbfC are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b0704
ybfD	None	H repeat-associated putative transposase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	H repeat-associated putative transposase, rhsC-linked; function unknown	YbfD is shorter than other paralogs, and has the 17 C-terminal residues right after the stop codon in another frame like the other paralogs. This indicates that ybfD may be a pseudogene fragment missing codons for residues 257-361. Full length paralogs YhhI and YdcC are putative transposases (Pfam PF01609).	b0706
yhhI	None	putative transposase	Putative factor; Not classified	H repeat-associated protein, RhsE-linked, function unknown	Full length paralogs YhhI and YdcC are putative transposases.	b3484
ydcC	None	H repeat-associated putative transposase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	H repeat-associated putative transposase, RhsE-linked, function unknown	Downregulated twofold by GSNO in defined medium (aerobic). Full length paralogs YhhI and YdcC are putative transposases.	b1460
narP	None	response regulator in two-component regulatory system with NarQ	Regulator; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Two-component regulator protein for nitrate/nitrite response; NarQ is cognate sensor protein	Null	b2193
fabI	envM, gts, qmeA	enoyl-[acyl-carrier-protein] reductase, NADH-dependent	Enzyme; Fatty acid and phosphatidic acid biosynthesis	Enoyl-ACP reductase, NADH dependent	fabI is an essential gene. Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004).	b1288
ftsN	msgA	essential cell division protein	Phenotype; Cell division	Cell division and growth; multicopy suppresses ftsA12	The ftsN gene is essential. Divisome protein. FtsN is a single pass inner membrane protein with a short cytoplasmic N-terminal domain and has a C-terminal periplasmic SPOR domain facilitating binding to the septal ring (Gerding, 2009; Arends, 2010). FtsN has been shown by FRET to directly interact with itself, FtsW, FtsI and ZapA (Alexeeva, 2010). ZapA has been shown by FRET to directly interact with itself, FtsN, FtsZ and FtsI (Alexeeva, 2010).	b3933
fadD	oldD	acyl-CoA synthetase (long-chain-fatty-acid--CoA ligase)	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Fatty acids	Acyl-CoA synthase	Null	b1805
cfa	cdfA	cyclopropane fatty acyl phospholipid synthase, SAM-dependent	Enzyme; Fatty acid and phosphatidic acid biosynthesis	Cyclopropane fatty acid synthase; CFA lipid modification is required for acid resistance in early stationary phase	Cfa binds a bicarbonate ion that is involved in catalysis. RpoS regulon. Overexpression causes abnormal biofilm architecture. 	b1661
menC	None	O-succinylbenzoyl-CoA synthase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Menaquinone, ubiquinone	o-succinylbenzoate synthase; menaquinone biosynthesis	Null	b2261
ychH	None	DUF2583 family putative inner membrane protein	Null	DUF2583 family putative inner membrane stress-induced protein; involved in cadmium and peroxide resistance	A ychH mutant strain is sensitive to hydrogen peroxide and cadmium (Lee, 2009). Two transmembrane helices predicted. Crp activated.	b1205
ibpA	hslT, htpN	heat shock chaperone	Factor; Adaptations, atypical conditions	Chaperone, heat-inducible protein of HSP20 family	RpoH regulon. The 5' UTR for ibpAB has a ROSE (repression of heat shock gene expression) family RNA thermometer. Induced during biofilm formation.	b3687
ibpB	hslS, htpE	heat shock chaperone	Factor; Adaptations, atypical conditions	Chaperone, heat-inducible protein of HSP20 family	RpoH regulon. Induced during biofilm formation.	b3686
yidE	yibE	putative transporter	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative AAE family transporter, function unknown	Predicted to be in the ST(3) structural class based on hydropathy profile (Lolkema, 2003), but is was not placed in the very similar IT superfamily in a study using phylogenetic methods (Prakash, 2003).	b3685
yceH	None	UPF0502 family protein	Null	UPF0502 family protein	Null	b1067
trmN	trmN6, yfiC	tRNA1(Val) (adenine(37)-N6)-methyltransferase	Enzyme; tRNA modification	tRNA1(Val) (adenine(37)-N6)-methyltransferase; tRNA m(6)A37 methyltransferase, SAM-dependent	TrmN(YfiC) is referred to as TrmN6 in the Modomics database (Czerwoniec, 2009).	b2575
pyrH	smbA, umk	uridylate kinase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Nucleotide interconversions	Uridylate kinase; hexameric	Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004).	b0171
wrbA	None	NAD(P)H:quinone oxidoreductase	Enzyme; Not classified	NAD(P)H:quinone oxidoreductase, type IV NQO; may protect against oxidative stress; dimeric, binds one FMN per monomer	WrbA was originally identified as a stationary phase TrpR-binding protein that affected the interaction of TrpR with its operator sites in vitro (Yang, 1993). However, subsequent experiments found similar effects with BSA, concluding that WrbA does not influence TrpR-operator binding in vitro (Grandori, 1998). Although WrbA may affect the association between Trp repressor and operators in stationary phase in vivo (Yang, 1993), this may be a non-specific effect. EcoArray search results indicate that wrbA transcripts are altered by rpoS, relA, trpA and trpR mutations, among others. wrbA is repressed by OxyS overexpression (Tjaden, 2006). otherPDB: 1ZWL(P.aeruginosa).	b1004
kup	trkD	potassium transporter	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Cations	Major constitutive K+ uptake permease at acidic pH; also transports Cs+ and Rb+	Unlike the other potassium transporters, Kup transports Cs+ and Rb+ as well as K+; this finding corrects an earlier report of Rb+ ion discrimination by Kup, from the same lab (Rhoads, 1977; Bossemeyer, 1989). The kup-ravA,viaA divergent operon promoter region binds FNR (Federowicz, 2014).	b3747
tesA	apeA, pldC	acyl-CoA thioesterase 1 and protease I and lysophospholipase L1	Enzyme; Fatty acid and phosphatidic acid biosynthesis	Multifunctional acyl-CoA thioesterase 1; protease I; lysophospholipase L1; monomeric	Null	b0494
hemE	hemC	uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Heme, porphyrin	Uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase	hemE mutants require media supplemented with 5-aminolevulinic acid (Sasarman, 1975). The hemE mutants in the Keio collection have been shown to harbor an intact copy of hemE in addition to the deletion allele (Yamamoto, 2009). The merodiploid hemE duplication in the Keio mutants strains probably compensates for the lack of supplemental 5-aminolevulinic acid.	b3997
gadE	yhiE, yhiT	gad regulon transcriptional activator	Regulator; Not classified	Transcriptional regulator of gadA and gadBC	The 750 bp region upstream of gadE is termed the Sensory Integration Region and contains sites needed for the regulation of three promoters (P1, -124; P2, -324/317; P3, -566) by activators YdeO, GadX, an a proposed unknown MnmE-dependent regulator, as well as controlling activation by GadE, GadW and EvgA; no Crp regulation or shorter transcripts were observed (Sayed, 2009). The ArrS sRNA is encoded on the complementary strand of the gadE 5' UTR and is GadE-regulated (Aiso, 2011). The presence of a novel putative sRNA ending at -750 was noted as data not shown (Sayed, 2009). GadE overexpression confers acid resistance. GadE is induced by YdeO overexpression. GadE is in the EvgAS regulon. GadE is a LuxR family regulator. GadE is possibly involved in the regulation of type III secretion systems in enterohemorrhagic E. coli O157:H7. Required for stationary phase-induced, pH 5.5 growth medium-induced, and EvgA-induced acid resistance. GadE and phosphorylated RcsB form a protein complex to regulate glutamate-, arginine- and lysine-dependent acid resistance (Krin, 2010).	b3512
flgL	flaT	flagellar hook-filament junction protein	Structural component; Surface structures	Flagellar synthesis, hook-associated protein	Overexpression causes mucoidy, decreases the amount of biofilm formed, and prevents flagella formation. Flagellar regulon.	b1083
nadC	None	quinolinate phosphoribosyltransferase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Pyridine nucleotide	Quinolinate phosphoribosyl transferase	Null	b0109
rnt	None	RNase T; exoribonuclease T; structured DNA 3' exonuclease; RNA processing; DNA repair	Enzyme; Degradation of RNA	RNase T; exoribonuclease T; structured DNA DNase; RNA processing; DNA repair	As an RNase, Rnt is required for 5S and 23S rRNA maturation and Rnt can mature tRNA and cleave sRNAs along with other RNAses (Reuven, 1993; Li, 1995; Li, 1998; Li, 1999). Terminal C and CC bases block ssRNA and ssDNA cleavage in vitro (Zuo, 2002). In vitro Rnt is an exonuclease for ssDNA with a higher affinity for DNA than RNA and the degradation of ssDNA by Rnt is tenfold more efficient than RNA degradation (Viswanathan, 1998; Zuo, 1999; Hsiao, 2012). Overproduction of Rnt suppresses the UV sensitivity of recJ, xseAB and sbcB mutants (Viswanathan, 1999). Mutant rnt cells are sensivitive to a variety of DNA damaging agents, including UV irradiation which conflicts with an earlier report (Padmanabha, 1991; Hsiao, 2014). Rnt digests Y-structured, bubble, and bulge DNA and works with Nfi(Endonuclease V) in DNA repair; Rnt can digest dsDNA and go through C and CC bases when digesting bulge and bubble DNA (Hsiao, 2014). 4/16 Rnt peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed (Maillet, 2007).	b1652
lhr	rhlF	putative ATP-dependent helicase	Enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	Probable ATP-dependent helicase, function unknown	Null	b1653
pepT	None	peptidase T	Enzyme; Degradation of proteins, peptides, glyco	Peptidase T, aminotripeptidase; anaerobically induced, biofilm-induced, cell-density induced	HT_Cmplx34_Cyt: ArgD+CbpA+PepT.	b1127
hypF	hydA	carbamoyl phosphate phosphatase and [NiFe] hydrogenase maturation protein	Regulator; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Hydrogenases 1,2,3 accessory protein; required for CN ligand synthesis at the metallocenter; HypF carbamoyltransferase activity forms thiocarbamate at terminal Cys of HypE; monomeric	FhlA regulon.	b2712
hydN	None	formate dehydrogenase-H, [4Fe-4S] ferredoxin subunit	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Iron-sulfur protein required for Hyd-3 activity	FhlA regulon.	b2713
glmM	mrsA, yhbF	phosphoglucosamine mutase	Putative enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Miscellaneous glucose metabolism	Phosphoglucosamine mutase; UDP-GlcNAc pathway, peptidoglycan, lipopolysaccharide synthesis; mRNA stability effects	glmM is an essential gene (Mengin-Lecreulx, 1996). The glmM mutants in the Keio collection have been shown to harbor an intact copy of glmM in addition to the deletion allele (Yamamoto, 2009). GlmM is an autophosphorylated enzyme (at Ser-102) is active form (Jolly, 2000). Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004).	b3176
stpA	hnsB, hsm-3, rsv	DNA binding protein, nucleoid-associated	Regulator; Basic proteins - synthesis, modification	RNA chaperone and DNA-binding protein; suppresses T4 td mutant; modulates micF stability; forms heteromers with, and stabilzed against proteolysis by, the paralogous H-NS protein; transcriptionally repressed by H-NS	StpA binds prefereably unstructured RNA weakly, with mainly electrostatic interactions that promote RNA folding (Mayer, 2007). 	b2669
yaaJ	None	putative transporter	Putative transport; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	Putative transporter, sodium:alanine (SAF) symporter family; function unknown	Null	b0007
talB	yaaK	transaldolase B	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Non-oxidative branch, pentose pathway	Transaldolase B	Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004).	b0008
caiD	yaaL	carnitinyl-CoA dehydratase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Amines	Carnitinyl-CoA dehydratase	Also known as crotonobetainyl CoA hydratase. The N-terminal sequence of CaiD has been verified in E. coli O44:K74 and the initial methione is removed (Elssner, 2001).	b0036
caiC	yaaM	putative crotonobetaine/carnitine-CoA ligase	Putative enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	Crotonobetain/carnitine-CoA ligase	Simliarity comparisons with Salmonella, Desulfotomaculum, Shewanella and Proteus CaiC homologs indicate that the second ATG is the likely start site, which also has a good predicted RBS of GGAG (Personal communication, G. Plunkett, 6/07).	b0037
caiB	yaaN	crotonobetainyl CoA:carnitine CoA transferase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	Carnitine dehydratase; crotonobetaine reductase, CI component	Uses gamma-butyrobetainyl-CoA as co-factor. 	b0038
caiA	yaaO	crotonobetaine reductase subunit II, FAD-binding	Putative regulator; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	Crotonobetaine reductase, CII component	Null	b0039
caiT	yaaP	putative transporter	Putative transport; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	L-carnitine/gamma-butyrobetaine antiporter; trimeric; BCCT family	CaiT does not require an ion gradient and does not respond to osmotic stress.	b0040
fixA	yaaQ	anaerobic carnitine reduction putative electron transfer flavoprotein subunit	Putative enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Electron transport	Required for anaerobic carnitine reduction	Although E. coli does not fix nitrogen, the E. coli fixABCX genes were named for their similarity to the Azorhizobium caulinodans and Rhizobium meliloti fix genes (Eichler, 1995).	b0041
fixB	yaaR	putative electron transfer flavoprotein, NAD/FAD-binding domain and ETFP adenine nucleotide-binding domain-like protein	Putative enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Electron transport	Required for anaerobic carnitine reduction	Although E. coli does not fix nitrogen, the E. coli fixABCX genes were named for their similarity to the Azorhizobium caulinodans and Rhizobium meliloti fix genes (Eichler, 1995).	b0042
fixC	yaaS	putative oxidoreductase	Putative carrier; Energy metabolism, carbon: Electron transport	Predicted flavoprotein oxidoreductase; may be involved in anaerobic carnitine reduction; predicted FAD-binding domain; function unknown	Although E. coli does not fix nitrogen, the E. coli fixABCX genes were named for their similarity to the Azorhizobium caulinodans and Rhizobium meliloti fix genes (Eichler, 1995). fixC, ydiS and ygcN are paralogs.	b0043
fixX	yaaT	putative 4Fe-4S ferredoxin-type protein	Putative carrier; Not classified	Related to carnitine metabolism	Although E. coli does not fix nitrogen, the E. coli fixABCX genes were named for their similarity to the Azorhizobium caulinodans and Rhizobium meliloti fix genes (Eichler, 1995).	b0044
yaaU	yabE	putative MFS sugar transporter; membrane protein	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative MFS transporter, function unknown; membrane protein	Although a wildtype strain was unaffected, a yaaU deletion mutant exhibited 10% survival after 20 minutes in 2.5 mM hydrogen peroxide (Kri Ko, 2014). YaaU is a member of the Sugar Porter (SP) family within the Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS) of transporters.	b0045
kefF	yabF	potassium-efflux system ancillary protein for KefC, glutathione-regulated; quinone oxidoreductase, FMN-dependent	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Potassium-efflux system ancillary protein for KefC; glutathione-regulated; quinone oxidoreductase, FMN-dependent	KefF is a quinone oxidoreductase, but mutants eliminating oxidoreductase activity are still competent for KefC activtion (Lyngberg, 2011).	b0046
lptD	imp, ostA, yabG	LPS assembly OM complex LptDE, beta-barrel component	Phenotype; Adaptations, atypical conditions	LPS assembly OM complex LptDE, beta-barrel component	LptDE is the terminal LPS OM receptor for ABC LPS exporter complex LptBFGC; LptE binds LPS (Chng, 2010). The outer membrane of an lptD(imp) mutant is permeable to large maltodextrins and sensitive to antibiotics and detergents (Sampson, 1989, Eggert, 2001). lptD is stress induced. lptD is paralogous to lptA. The lptD(imp) gene encodes an essential outer membrane protein (Braun, 2002, Wu, 2006). A deletion mutant of lptD is non-viable (Baba, 2006). The LptDE structure from S. flexneri (an E. coli strain) in PDB 4Q35 differs in only 3 amino acids out of 784 for LptD and 1/175 for LptE (Qiao, 2014).	b0054
djlA	yabH	membrane-anchored DnaK co-chaperone, DNA-binding protein	Factor; Chaperones	DnaK co-chaperone, membrane-anchored, DNA-binding protein; mutants rapidly accumulate suppressors	DjlA overproduction activates RcsBC and Cps synthesis and causes mucoidy (Clarke, 1996; Kelley, 1997). The DjlA transmembrane domain is a dimerization domain (Toutain, 2003). DjlA has a single N-terminal transmembrane domain and a cytoplasmic domain with a C-terminal J-domain (Clarke, 1996). DjlA, CbpA, and DnaJ are all DNA-binding proteins, with the membrane bound cytosolic protein DjlA having high affinity for DNA (Gur, 2005).	b0055
yabI	None	ionizing radiation survival protein; DedA family inner membrane protein	Null	Ionizing radiation survival protein; DedA family inner membrane protein, function unknown	A yabI mutation is one of many selected in a strain evolved for resistance to high levels of ionizing radiation; a single yabI deletion mutant has about a ten-fold drop in survival after radiation exposure as compared to a ybjN+ strain (Byrne, 2014). DedA superfamily proteins YqjA and YghB likely have redundant functions since only a double mutant has defects; DedA superfamily members yabI or yohD can complement the yqjA yghB double mutant when overproduced, but a dedA clone cannot complement (Thompkins, 2008). The E. coli K-12 DedA superfamily (SNARE associated Golgi protein/PF09335) has eight paralogs in two families, the COG0586 DedA/YghB family (including the DedA/YabI/YohD subfamily and the general envelope maintenance protein YghB/YqjA subfamily) and the YdjX family (including the COG0398 YdjX/YdjZ subfamily and the COG1238 YqaA subfamily) (Doerrler, 2013; K.E.R.).	b0065
thiQ	sfuC, yabJ	thiamine/thiamine pyrophosphate ABC transporter ATPase	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Other	Thiamine/thiamine pyrophosphate ABC transporter ATPase	Thiamine (vitamin B1), thiamine pyrophosphate, and thiamine monophosphate uptake is energy-dependent; the uptake of thiamine and thiamine pyrophosphate have been assayed directly (Kawasaki, 1969; Nishimune, 1971; Leach, 1979; Nishimune, 1980; Hollenbach, 2002b). Salmonella thiamine and thiamine pyrophosphate uptake has been assayed directly and is dependent on the thiBPQ operon (Webb, 1998). Although thiamine monophosphate uptake has not been assayed directly, thiamine monophosphate import by ThiBPQ may occur since the ThiB periplasmic binding protein binds thiamine, thiamine monophosphate, and thiamine pyrophosphate (Hollenbach, 2002a). Thiamine, thiamine monophosphate and thiamine pyrophosphate can feed a thiamine auxotroph, indicating all three compounds can be imported (Nakayama, 1972). Biosynthesized thiamine monophosphate is converted to the cofactor thiamine pyrophosphate by thiamine monophosphate kinase (ThiL); imported thiamine is converted to thiamine monophosphate by the salvage enzyme thiamine kinase (ThiK) (Nakayama, 1972; Melnick, 2004). thiBPQ operon expression is controlled by a thiamine pyrophosphate (TPP) responsive riboswitch in the 128 nt 5' UTRl the THI element 5' UTR has been reported in intergenic sRNA searches as sroA/tpe79; attenuation of transcription at the TPP-bound riboswitch produces the 93 nt sroA sRNA, ending at 75608. The experimentally determined RNA start for sroA is the start of the thiBPQ mRNA (Vogel, 2003). sroA is not annotated as a separate gene and the sroA transcript is part of the thiBPQ mRNA. The thiB riboswitch is the target for the antibiotic pyrithiamine.	b0066
thiP	sfuB, yabK	thiamine/thiamine pyrophosphate ABC transporter permease	Null	Thiamine/thiamine pyrophosphate ABC transporter permease	Thiamine (vitamin B1), thiamine pyrophosphate, and thiamine monophosphate uptake is energy-dependent; the uptake of thiamine and thiamine pyrophosphate have been assayed directly (Kawasaki, 1969; Nishimune, 1971; Leach, 1979; Nishimune, 1980; Hollenbach, 2002b). Salmonella thiamine and thiamine pyrophosphate uptake has been assayed directly and is dependent on the thiBPQ operon (Webb, 1998). Although thiamine monophosphate uptake has not been assayed directly, thiamine monophosphate import by ThiBPQ may occur since the ThiB periplasmic binding protein binds thiamine, thiamine monophosphate, and thiamine pyrophosphate (Hollenbach, 2002a). Thiamine, thiamine monophosphate and thiamine pyrophosphate can feed a thiamine auxotroph, indicating all three compounds can be imported (Nakayama, 1972). Biosynthesized thiamine monophosphate is converted to the cofactor thiamine pyrophosphate by thiamine monophosphate kinase (ThiL); imported thiamine is converted to thiamine monophosphate by the salvage enzyme thiamine kinase (ThiK) (Nakayama, 1972; Melnick, 2004). thiBPQ operon expression is controlled by a thiamine pyrophosphate (TPP) responsive riboswitch in the 128 nt 5' UTRl the THI element 5' UTR has been reported in intergenic sRNA searches as sroA/tpe79; attenuation of transcription at the TPP-bound riboswitch produces the 93 nt sroA sRNA, ending at 75608. The experimentally determined RNA start for sroA is the start of the thiBPQ mRNA (Vogel, 2003). sroA is not annotated as a separate gene and the sroA transcript is part of the thiBPQ mRNA. The thiB riboswitch is the target for the antibiotic pyrithiamine.	b0067
thiB	sfuA, tbpA, yabL	thiamine/thiamine pyrophosphate/thiamine monophosphate ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Other	Thiamine/thiamine pyrophosphate/thiamine monophosphate ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein; TBP; monomeric	TThiamine (vitamin B1), thiamine pyrophosphate, and thiamine monophosphate uptake is energy-dependent; the uptake of thiamine and thiamine pyrophosphate have been assayed directly (Kawasaki, 1969; Nishimune, 1971; Leach, 1979; Nishimune, 1980; Hollenbach, 2002b). Salmonella thiamine and thiamine pyrophosphate uptake has been assayed directly and is dependent on the thiBPQ operon (Webb, 1998). Although thiamine monophosphate uptake has not been assayed directly, thiamine monophosphate import by ThiBPQ may occur since the ThiB(TbpA) periplasmic binding protein binds thiamine, thiamine monophosphate, and thiamine pyrophosphate (Hollenbach, 2002a). Thiamine, thiamine monophosphate and thiamine pyrophosphate can feed a thiamine auxotroph, indicating all three compounds can be imported (Nakayama, 1972). Biosynthesized thiamine monophosphate is converted to the cofactor thiamine pyrophosphate by thiamine monophosphate kinase (ThiL); imported thiamine is converted to thiamine monophosphate by the salvage enzyme thiamine kinase (ThiK) (Nakayama, 1972; Melnick, 2004). thiBPQ operon expression is controlled by a thiamine pyrophosphate (TPP) responsive riboswitch in the 128 nt 5' UTRl the THI element 5' UTR has been reported in intergenic sRNA searches as sroA/tpe79; attenuation of transcription at the TPP-bound riboswitch produces the 93 nt sroA sRNA, ending at 75608. The experimentally determined RNA start for sroA is the start of the thiBPQ mRNA (Vogel, 2003). sroA is not annotated as a separate gene and the sroA transcript is part of the thiBPQ mRNA. The thiB riboswitch is the target for the antibiotic pyrithiamine. The first 18 aa of ThiB constitute a cleavable Type I signal peptide (Hollenbach, 2002).	b0068
leuD	None	3-isopropylmalate dehydratase small subunit	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Leucine	3-isopropylmalate dehydratase small subunit; also called alpha-Isopropylmalate isomerase	Null	b0071
leuC	None	3-isopropylmalate dehydratase large subunit	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Leucine	3-isopropylmalate dehydratase large subunit; also called alpha-isopropylmalate isomerase	LeuCD catalyzes the second step of leucine biosynthesis.	b0072
leuB	None	3-isopropylmalate dehydrogenase, NAD(+)-dependent	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Leucine	3-isopropylmalate dehydrogenase, NAD(+)-dependent	LeuB catalyzes the third step of leucine biosynthesis.	b0073
greB	None	transcript cleavage factor	Regulator; RNA synthesis, modification, DNA transcription	Transcript cleavage factor	Null	b3406
ybiA	None	DUF1768 family protein	Null	Putative component of NAD-utilizing pathway; may operate on ADP-ribose derivatives; required for swarming phenotype	YbiA may be a component of an NAD-utilizing pathways that operates on ADP-ribose derivatives, and possibly has a role, in conjunction with KptA, in RNA repair, where NAD is used to remove 2'–3' cyclic phosphodiester linkages (de Souza, 2012). DUF1768 family.	b0798
ybiB	None	putative family 3 glycosyltransferase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Putative family 3 glycosyltransferase	YbiB is a predicted family 3 glycosyltransferase (Pfam PF00591) also containing an N-terminal domain associated with phosphorylated ribose substrates (Pfam PF02885). YbiB is homologous to TrpD and GlcD.	b0800
ybiC	None	putative dehydrogenase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Function unknown, lactate, malate dehydrogenase family	Null	b0801
gcl	None	glyoxylate carboligase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	Glyoxylate carboligase, glyoxylate-inducible	Null	b0507
hyi	gip, ybbG	hydroxypyruvate isomerase	Phenotype; Not classified	Hydroxypyruvate isomerase, glyoxylate-inducible; product is tartronate semialdehyde	Null	b0508
thiC	None	phosphomethylpyrimidine synthase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Thiamine	Phosphomethylpyrimidine synthase, thiamine biosynthesis; requires SAM and a reduced 4Fe-4S cluster	E. coli thiC mutants are blocked in the conversion of AIR to HMP (Vander Horn, 1993). In vitro, overexpressed E. coli ThiC increases phosphomethylpyrimidine synthase activity although a cell extract is also required, probably to reduce the 4Fe-4S cluster (Lawhorn, 2004). E. coli ThiC contains a 4Fe-4S cluster that requires either IscA or SufA for proper assembly (Tan, 2009). In vitro, purified Salmonella thiC-encoded phosphomethylpyrimidine synthase produces HMP (4-amino-2-methyl-5-hydroxymethylpyrimidine) from AIR (5-amino-1-(5-phospho-D-ribosyl)imidazole) utilizing SAM and a labile 4Fe-4S iron-sulfur cluster in a reaction reminiscent of Radical SAM family reactions although ThiC does not contain the Radical SAM Cys signature motif (Martinez-Gomez, 2008). An apbE mutant of Salmonella typhimurium is blocked for thiamine biosynthesis at the ThiC step (conversion of AIR to HMP) (Beck, 1998; Beck, 1999). HMP is also known as 4-amino-5-hydroxymethyl-2-methylpyrimidine and AIR is also known as 5-aminoimidazole ribotide. thiCEFSGH operon expression is controlled by a thiamine pyrophosphate (TPP) responsive riboswitch in the 5' UTR. The thiC riboswitch is the target for the antibiotic pyrithiamine. The transcription start point (tsp) of the thiCEFSGH operon has not been mapped.	b3994
thiE	thiA	thiamine phosphate synthase (thiamine phosphate pyrophosphorylase)	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Thiamine	Thiamine phosphate synthase; thiamine phosphate pyrophosphorylase, TMP-PPase; thiamine-thiazole moiety synthesis	The ThiE sequence has been confirmed using MS/MS: the measured mass of the intact protein is 23014.8 indicating that the initial Met is not clipped (Kelleher, 1998). No pmid: Backstrom AD, Austin R., McMordie S, Begley TP (1995) Biosynthesis of thiamin I: the function of the thiE gene product. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 117:2351-2. yjbQ is a multicopy suppressor of thiE (Morett, 2008).	b3993
thiF	thiA	adenylyltransferase, modifies ThiS C-terminus	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Thiamine	Adenylyltransferase, modifies ThiS C-terminus; ThiS-thiocarboxylate (ThiS-COSH) synthesis; thiamine-thiazole moiety synthesis; complexes with ThiS	The ThiF sequence has been confirmed using MS/MS, however since use of the start codon was forced during cloning, this is not a verification of the start site: the measured mass of the intact protein is 26970.2 indicating that the initial Met is not removed (Kelleher, 1998).	b3992
thiG	thiB	thiamine biosynthesis ThiGH complex subunit	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Thiamine	Thiazole synthase; thiamine-thiazole moiety synthesis; complexes with ThiH	The ThiG sequence has been confirmed using MS/MS: the measured mass of the intact protein is 26896.5 indicating that the initial Met is not clipped (Kelleher, 1998). ThiG synthesizes the thiazole phosphate intermediate (4-methyl-5-beta-hydroxyethyl thiazole phosphate) in thiamine biosynthesis utilizing dehyrodglycine (derived from tyrosine by ThiH in the ThiGH complex), DXP (1-deoxyxylulose 5-phosphate), S-adenosylmethionine (SAM/AdoMet) and the sulfur donor ThiFS thiocarboxylate (Kriek, 2007). Aldolase family. 	b3991
thiH	thiB	tyrosine lyase, involved in thiamine-thiazole moiety synthesis	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Thiamine	Tyrosine lyase, involved in thiamine-thiazole moiety synthesis; complexes with ThiG; [4Fe-4S]-SAM cluster; Radical SAM superfamily	Anaerobically, glycine probably cannot be oxidized to form the probable thiamine biosynthetic intermediate dehydroglycine, so it is derived from tyrosine by the action of the tyrosine lyase ThiH; the products of the in vitro ThiH reaction are para-cresol and hydroglycine (Kriek, 2007). In E. coli B, para-cresol is probably converted to 4-hydroxy-benzoyl alcohol in vivo by an oxidase that is missing from K strains (Kriek, 2007), and thus 4-hydroxy-benzoyl alcohol is probably not the primary tyrosine cleavage product as previously suggested (White, 1979). 	b3990
lipB	cde	octanoyltransferase; octanoyl-[ACP]:protein N-octanoyltransferase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Lipoate	Octanoyltransferase; octanoyl-[ACP]:protein N-octanoyltransferase	Revised TTG start is required for active protein. LipB is also an octanoyl-protein ligase.	b0630
ybeD	None	UPF0250 family protein	Null	UPF0250 family protein; required for swarming and phage lambda growth	Mutants in ybeD are defective for phage lambda growth (Maynard, 2010). Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004). ACT-like domain (Grant, 2006). 	b0631
ybeF	None	LysR family putative transcriptional regulator	Putative regulator; Not classified	Putative LysR-family transcriptional regulator, function unknown LysR-family transcriptional regulator, function unknown	Null	b0629
moaA	bisA, chlA, narA	molybdopterin biosynthesis protein A	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Molybdopterin	MPT synthesis; chlorate resistance protein A	The moaA 5' UTR has a molybdenum cofactor (Moco) sensitive riboswitch. Radical SAM superfamily. A predicted CueR site near the start of translation imported from RegulonDB has been removed; although there is some evidence of regulation by CueR, this binding site has not been confirmed.	b0781
moaB	None	inactive molybdopterin adenylyltransferase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Molybdopterin	Inactive molybdopterin adenylyltransferase	Although MoaB is a Mog paralog and has a predicted molybdopterin binding site, a moaB mutant has no defect in molybdenum cofactor synthesis; so the role of MoaB, if any, in molybdenum metabolism is unknown (Kozmin, 2013). Although the MoaB ortholog from P. furiosus has MPT adenylyl transferase activity, E. coli MoaB is inactive (Bevers, 2008). Mog and MoaB are paralogs. HT_Cmplx43_Mem: DcrB+MoaB+OsmE+Slp+YajG+YraP.	b0782
moaD	chlM	molybdopterin synthase, small subunit	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Molybdopterin	Molybdopterin (MPT) synthase, small subunit; chlorate resistance; dimer of dimers with MoaE	The C-terminus of MoaD is thiocarboxylated. YnjE, IscS, MoaD and MoeB form a complex in vivo (Dahl, 2011).	b0784
moaE	None	molybdopterin synthase, large subunit	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Molybdopterin	Molybdopterin (MPT) synthase, large subunit; chlorate resistance; dimer of dimers with MoaD	Null	b0785
marB	None	periplasmic mar operon regulator	Putative transport; Drug/analog sensitivity	mar operon regulator, periplasmic	MarB slows the rate of mar operon transcription but does not reduce mar mRNA stability; MarB has a strongly predicted 21 aa signal peptide capable of localizing PhoA to the periplasm; as a periplasmic protein the effect of MarB on mar operon transcription is indirect and MarB may have another function (Vinué, 2013). marB mutants have increased marA transcript and stress resistance (Nichols, 2011).	b1532
sseA	None	3-mercaptopyruvate sulfurtransferase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	3-mercaptopyruvate sulfurtransferase; enhances serine sensitivity (inhibits homoserine deHase) on lactate; rhodanese-like protein	sseA mutants are sensitive to a large number of unrelated antibiotics, reversible by adding exogenous hydrogen sulfide (Shatalin, 2011). 	b2521
sseB	None	rhodanase-like enzyme, sulfur transfer from thiosulfate	Phenotype; Not classified	Enhances serine sensitivity (inhibits homoserine deHase) on lactate; weaker than sseA	Null	b2522
glnE	None	fused deadenylyltransferase/adenylyltransferase for glutamine synthetase	Enzyme; Proteins - translation and modification	Protein adenylyltransferase, modifies glutamine synthase; catalyzes adenylation and deadenylation	GlnE has two homologous domains: the N-terminal domain is the deadenylase, and the C-terminal domain is the adenylase (Jaggi, 1997).	b3053
ygiF	None	inorganic triphosphatase	Null	Inorganic triphosphatase	Altough the inorganic triphosphatase YgiF belongs to the CYTH family of adenyl cyclases and thiamine triphosphatases, it has no adenyl cyclase activity in vitro and only a very weak thiamine triphosphatase activity; most of the inorganic triphosphatase activity in extracts is due to inorganic pyrophosphatase activity (Kohn, 2012).	b3054
smf	None	DNA recombination-mediator A family protein	Null	DNA recombination-mediator A family protein	Smf is homologous to the H. influenzae DNA protecting protein DprA and cloned Smf (E.c.) partially complements the transformation defect of a dprA (H.i.) mutant; a smf (E.c.) mutant had no transformation, Hfr-conjugation, recombination, or DNA repair defect (Smeets, 2006). Named smf because it is divergent to fms (def) gene. smf is predicted to have a CRP-S promoter co-regulated by both Crp and Sxy (Cameron, 2006). The RecQ domain protein Psyr_3804 from Pseudomonas syringae has been identified as a toxin with the Smf domain protein Psyr_3805 as the antitoxin, although there is no indication that the E. coli RecQ/Smf form a toxin-antitoxin pair (Sberro, 2013).	b4473
smg	None	DUF494 family putative periplasmic protein	Null	DUF494 family protein, function unknown	Null	b3284
kch	None	voltage-gated potassium channel	Null	Voltage-gated potassium channel protein; overproduction increases the permeability of the cytoplamsic membrane to K+; not involved in K+ uptake; overproduction alters membrane composition; homotetrameric membrane protein	Consistently co-purifies with the degradosome.	b1250
yciI	None	putative DGPF domain-containing enzyme	Null	Putative DGPF domain enzyme	Null	b1251
clsA	cls, nov, yciJ	cardiolipin synthase 1	Enzyme; Macromolecule synthesis: Phospholipids	Cardiolipin synthase 1; mutants are dihydroxybutylphosphonate resistant; novobiocin sensitivity	Three paralogous cls genes encoding cardiolipin synthases, clsA(cls), clsB(ybhO) and clsC(ymdC), need to be deleted in order to prevent in vivo cardiolipin synthesis; most studies on the effects of cardiolipin depletion only used clsA(cls) mutant strains that still sythesize cardiolipin (Tan, 2012). Overexpression causes filamentous biofilm formation.	b1249
evgA	None	response regulator in two-component regulatory system with EvgS	Putative regulator; Not classified	Response regulator for acid and drug resistance, cognate to EvgS; homodimeric	EvgAS overexpression induces genes involved in acid resistance and drug resistance. EvgAS overexpression in envZ-deleted strain induces ompC expression.	b2369
evgS	None	hybrid sensory histidine kinase in two-component regulatory system with EvgA	Putative regulator; Not classified	Sensor kinase for acid and drug resistance, cognate to EvgA	Overexpression causes abnormal biofilm architecture. The first 21 aa of EvgS are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. 	b2370
insZ'	ychG, ychR	pseudogene, transposase homolog	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction, IS4 transposase family, in ISZ'	Two frameshifts (at codons 62 and 111) and an internal deletion of about 150 codons have mutated this homolog of IS4 transposase InsG (442 aa). An internal 152 aa are present in InsG that are apparently deleted in InsZ' (they would be between positions 238 and 239 in the 299 aa hypothetically reconstructed discontinuous InsG' pseudogene protein sequence). This internal deletion also corresponds to residues 243-383 of the 445 aa IS4 transposase homolog VV1_2235 from Vibrio vulnificus (UniProtKB: Q8DAG), which is the closest homolog to InsZ'. InsG is the closest E. coli homolog. There are numerous pseudogene alleles of insZ' in other strains of E. coli, but no wild type insZ alleles have yet been found.	b4573
proP	None	proline/glycine betaine transporter	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	Proline/betaine permease, minor; osmosensor/osmoregulator	Mg(2+) stimulon-PhoPQ regulon, EvgAS-PhoPQ cascade enhanced-expression subset. Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS).	b4111
eptA	pagB(S.t.), pmrC(S.t.), yjdB	lipid A phosphoethanolamine transferase	Null	Lipid A phosphoethanolamine transferase; associated with polymyxin resistance	EptA co-localizes with ZipA. Putative first gene in basSR operon.	b4114
basS	pmrB(S.t.)	sensory histidine kinase in two-component regulatory system with BasR	Enzyme; RNA synthesis, modification, DNA transcription	Histidine protein kinase sensor for Lipid A modification genes; two-component system involved in polymyxin resistance that senses high extracellular Fe(2+)	BasR is the cognate response regulator of the BasSR two-component system. The BasSR regulon has been primarily characterized in Salmonella; unlike E. coli, Salmonella also activates PmrAB(BasSR) in low Mg(2+), mediated by PhoPQ and the PmrD protein.	b4112
basR	pmrA(S.t.)	response regulator in two-component regulatory system with BasS	Regulator; RNA synthesis, modification, DNA transcription	Response regulator for Lipid A modification genes; two-component system involved in polymyxin resistance that senses high extracellular Fe(2+)	BasS is the cognate sensor protein of the BasSR two-component system. Constitutive allele basR53 (pmrA53) confers polymyxin B resistance and deoxycholate hypersensitivity. EvgAS regulon. BasSR confers resistance to Fe(III)-mediated killing. The BasSR regulon has been primarily characterized in Salmonella; unlike E. coli, Salmonella also activates PmrAB(BasSR) in low Mg(2+), mediated by PhoPQ and the PmrD protein.	b4113
sugE	None	multidrug efflux system protein	Putative factor; Not classified	Multidrug efflux pump; overexpression resistance to cetylpyridinium	SugE was originally isolated as a multicopy suppressor, capable of suppressing the phage T4 growth defect of a groL mutant (Greener, 1993). sugE is not a multicopy suppressor of a groL mutant's poor growth at 43C, suggesting that sugE is not a generalized suppressor of groL defects (Chung, 2002). Unpublished results confirm that sugE is a multicopy suppressor of groL, but the tested phenotype of the groL mutant was not reported (Bay, 2007). SugE belongs to the SMR efflux pump family, DMT superfamily.	b4148
baeS	None	sensory histidine kinase in two-component regulatory system with BaeR	Enzyme; RNA synthesis, modification, DNA transcription	Sensor kinase for mdtABCD, acrD and spy	Confers novobiocin and deoxycholate resistance via activation of mdtABCD and acrD transcription. BaeRS multicopy suppresses envZ and phoR/creC mutations. Spy is induced by envelope stress, dependent on both CpxR and BaeSR.	b2078
baeR	None	response regulator in two-component regulatory system with BaeS	Regulator; RNA synthesis, modification, DNA transcription	Response regulator for mdtABCD, acrD and spy	Confers novobiocin and deoxycholate resistance via activation of mdtABCD and acrD transcription. BaeRS multicopy suppresses envZ and phoR/creC mutations. Spy is induced by envelope stress, dependent on both CpxR and BaeSR.	b2079
mfd	None	transcription-repair coupling factor	Factor; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	Transcription repair coupling factor	Mfd dissociates transcription elongation complexes blocked at nonpairing lesions and mediates recruitment of DNA repair proteins. Arrested (backtracked) RNAP complexes are are also rescued by Mfd promoting forward translocation. Mfd structure resembles UvrB, including UvrA binding site, but no ATP-binding site.	b1114
rnb	None	ribonuclease II	Enzyme; Degradation of RNA	RNase II; mRNA degradation	RNase II is attached to the membrane via its N-terminal amphipathic helix; RNase II interacts with itself (Lu, 2013). The rnb translation initiation site was confirmed using rnb-lacZ fusions (Zilhao, 1993).	b1286
metN	abc, metD	DL-methionine transporter subunit	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	ABC transporter ATPase, L,D-methionine uptake; methionine sulfoximine sensitivity	Upregulated by GSNO in defined medium (aerobic).	b0199
mdlA	mdl	putative multidrug ABC transporter ATPase	Null	ABC exporter permease-ATPase, function unknown	Although MdlAB are similar to multidrug exporters, no overexpression resistances were found. mdlA and mdlB were fused by a frameshift mutation or sequencing error in the original report. mdlA and mdlB were fused by a frameshift mutation or sequencing error in the original report. Rob regulon.	b0448
sdaB	None	L-serine dehydratase 2	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Amino acids	L-serine dehydratase 2; also known as serine deaminase; L-SD2	Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004).	b2797
artP	None	arginine ABC transporter ATPase	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	Arginine ABC transporter ATPase	Repressed during biofilm formation.	b0864
artI	None	arginine transporter subunit	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	Periplasmic binding protein in artPIQM operon, ligand unknown	Repressed during biofilm formation.	b0863
artQ	None	arginine ABC transporter permease	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	Arginine ABC transporter permease	Null	b0862
artM	None	arginine ABC transporter permease	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	Arginine ABC transporter permease	Null	b0861
artJ	None	arginine ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	Arginine ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein	Null	b0860
potF	None	putrescine ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	Putrescine ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein	PotIHGF putrescine ABC transport system. The potFGHI promoter region binds ArcA and potFGHI expression is repressed by ArcA (Federowicz, 2014).	b0854
potG	None	putrescine ABC transporter ATPase	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	Putrescine ABC transporter ATPase	PotIHGF putrescine ABC transport system. The potFGHI promoter region binds ArcA and potFGHI expression is repressed by ArcA (Federowicz, 2014).	b0855
potH	None	putrescine ABC transporter permease	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	Putrescine ABC transporter permease	PotIHGF putrescine ABC transport system. The potFGHI promoter region binds ArcA and potFGHI expression is repressed by ArcA (Federowicz, 2014).	b0856
potI	None	putrescine ABC transporter permease	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	Putrescine ABC transporter permease	PotIHGF putrescine ABC transport system. The potFGHI promoter region binds ArcA and potFGHI expression is repressed by ArcA (Federowicz, 2014).	b0857
nohQ'	nohA	pseudogene, Qin prophage; Phage DNA packaging protein Nu1 family	Phage or Prophage Related	Pseudogene, phage lambda Nu1 homolog, Qin prophage; terminase small subunit family, putative DNA packaging protein	Fur regulon. NohQ(NohA) is nearly identical to Nu1, but the last 13 aa of NohQ appear to have been deleted. Upstream of the nohQ(Nu1) gene is cosQ(ecos1), a homolog of the lambda cos gene, which can be cut by lambda terminase in vivo after genome coordinate 579868 (Kotani, 1992).	b1548
nohD	nohB	DLP12 prophage; DNA packaging protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Phage lambda Nu1 homolog, DLP12 prophage, terminase family; small subunit, putative DNA packaging protein	Most of NohD(NohB) is nearly identical to Nu1, but the last 9 aa of Nu1 are missing from NohD(NohB), which could be an allelic variation or a product of the deletion that presumably removed the adjacent large subunit protein A gene homolog. Upstream of the nohD(Nu1) gene is cosD(ecos2), a homolog of the lambda cos gene, which can be cut by lambda terminase in vivo after genome coordinate 1634580 (Kotani, 1992).	b0560
ydeA	sotB	arabinose efflux transporter, arabinose-inducible	Transport; Transport of small molecules: sugars	Arabinose efflux transporter, arabinose-inducible	YdeA exports arabinose, and to a lesser extent IPTG; a ydeA mutation reduces arabinose efflux and YdeA overexpression interferes with arabinose accumulation (Carole, 1999; Bost, 1999). ydeA is induced 8-fold by arabinose; YdeA overexpression reduces intracellular arabinose, but not xylose, concentration; other compounds were not tested (Koita, 2012). Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS).	b1528
marC	ydeB, ydeC	UPF0056 family inner membrane protein	Null	UPF0056 family inner membrane protein, function unknown; not involved in antibiotic resistance	marC is not regulated by marR and marC mutations and clones do not confer antibiotic phenotypes (McDermott, 2007). marC, ychE and yhgN are paralogs (Pfam PF01914). Topology mapped using protein fusions.	b1529
eamA	ydeD	cysteine and O-acetyl-L-serine efflux system	Null	Efflux pump for cysteine and O-acetyl-L-serine; part of a L-cysteine/L-cystine shuttle system confering hydrogen peroxide resistance	EamA(YdeD) and FliY constitute a L-cysteine/L-cystine shuttle system confering hydrogen peroxide resistance; EamA exports L-cysteine to the periplasm where it scavenges hydrogen peroxide; eamA(ydeD), eamB(yfiK) and fliY are induced by hydrogen peroxide and cysteine (Ohtsu, 2010). EamA belongs to the EamA/RhaT transporter family, DMT superfamily. Dasler et al. used start codon mutagenesis to verify this start codon.	b1533
ydeE	ydeF	putative transporter	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative arabinose efflux transporter	YdeE overexpression reduces intracellular arabinose, but not xylose, concentration; other compounds were not tested (Koita, 2012). A ydeE mutant is defective for swarming motility. No overexpression resistances were found for YdeE. Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS).	b1534
dgcZ	ydeG, ydeH	diguanylate cyclase, zinc-sensing	Null	Diguanylate cyclase, zinc-sensing	DgcZ(YdeH) is a zinc-sensing diguanylate cyclase that inhibits biofilm formation (Zähringer, 2013). Full induction of pgaD requires c-di-GMP specifically produced by DgcZ(YdeH) (Boehm, 2009). DgcZ(YdeH) mRNA is translationally repressed by CsrA (Jonas, 2008). DgcZ(YdeH) overexpression causes a 20-fold increase in c-di-GMP and represses motility, but a dgcZ(ydeH) mutant has little effect (Jonas, 2008). The results of Jonas (2008) might indicate that although the c-di-GMP spike inhibits motility it is not known if this is the normal function of the overproduced diguanylate cyclase or if the overexpression induced non-physiological crosstalk. DgcZ(YdeH) has an N-terminal MCP-signal associated domain (PF13682) that is often C-terminal to an MCP-signal domain (PF00015) not found in DgcZ(YdeH) family proteins but may be indicative of a physiological role in chemotaxis or motility; DgcZ(YdeH) has a C-terminal diguanylate cyclase GGDEF domain.	b1535
ydeI	None	hydrogen peroxide resistance OB fold protein; putative periplasmic protein	Null	Hydrogen peroxide resistance OB fold protein; predicted periplasmic protein	YdeI has a bacterial OB fold domain (BOF, PF04076) (Ginalski, 2004). A ydeI mutant is more sensitive to hydrogen peroxide (Lee, 2010). The first 19 aa of YdeI are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. ydeI and ygiW are paralogs.	b1536
ydeJ	None	inactive PncC family protein	Null	Inactive PncC domain protein, function unknown	YdeJ and YfaY are inactive PncC homologs; PncC(YgaD) is the only one of three PncC(CinA) domain (PF02464) proteins that has NMN deamidase activity (Galeazzi, 2011).	b1537
psuK	pscK, yeiC	pseudouridine kinase	Enzyme; pseudouridine utilization	Pseudouridine kinase; enzyme; pseudouridine utilization	PsuK was characterized as the pseudouridine kinase required for pseudouridine utilization in E. coli UT189 (Preumont, 2008; Solomon, 1971). Mono-, di-, and triphosphates of pseudouridine have been identified in E. coli extracts (Ginsberg, 1968). psuKGT are not to be confused with mutations previously labeled psu before they were mapped to ORFs, namely (1) the psu polarity suppressor mutations that were found to map the the rho gene encoding the Rho protein, and (2) the pleiotropic suppressor psu mutations (<A HREF="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed?term=8380152" target="v">Ephrati-Elizur, 1993</A>) that have never been mapped to an ORF.	b2166
accA	None	acetyl-CoA carboxylase, carboxytransferase, alpha subunit	Enzyme; Fatty acid and phosphatidic acid biosynthesis	Acetyl-CoA carboxylase, carboxyltransferase alpha subunit	Acetyl-CoA carboxylase AccA(2)AccD(2) represses its own translation, mediated by the beta subunit (AccD) binding to the accA and accD mRNAs; translation repression is relieved by acetyl-CoA (Meades, 2010).	b0185
dkgB	yafB	2,5-diketo-D-gluconate reductase B	Putative enzyme; Not classified	2,5-diketo-D-gluconate reductase B; glyoxal reductase; glyoxal resistance protein	DkgB(YafB) has moderate glyoxal reductase activity and weak glycolaldehyde reductase activity; deletion of dkgA(yqhE) increases sensitivity to glyoxal (Lee, 2013). Overexpression of dkgB(yafB) confers glyoxal resistance (Kwon, 2012). 4/32 DkgB(YafB) peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed (Maillet, 2007).	b0207
yafC	None	LysR family putative transcriptional regulator	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative LysR-family transcriptional regulator, function unknown	Null	b0208
yafD	None	endo/exonuclease/phosphatase family protein	Null	Endo/exonuclease/phosphatase family protein; function unknown	YafD belongs to the Pfam PF03372 family of magnesium dependent endonucleases and phosphatases.	b0209
yafE	None	putative S-adenosyl-L-methionine-dependent methyltransferase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Predicted SAM-dependent methyltransferase, function unknown	Null	b0210
degS	hhoB, htrH	serine endoprotease, periplasmic	Enzyme; Degradation of proteins, peptides, glyco	Serine protease, degrades periplasmic RseA, activating RpoE; multicopy suppressor of prc; periplasmic stress sensor for unfolded or misfolded OMPs	degS is an essential gene. DegS may be anchored to the inner membrane. Mutants have elevated OM vesiculation (McBroom, 2006).	b3235
cyaY	None	iron-dependent inhibitor of iron-sulfur cluster formation; frataxin; iron-binding and oxidizing protein	Putative factor; Chaperones	Iron-dependent inhibitor of iron-sulfur cluster formation; binds IcsS; iron sensor; iron-binding and oxidizing protein, frataxin	Frataxin-related. The previously proposed role of CyaY as an iron-sulfur cluster donor is contradicted and CyaY is shown to be an iron-dependent inhibitor of iron-sulfur cluster formation by binding to but not inhibiting the activity of IscS (Adinolfi, 2009). CyaY forms iron-promoted aggregates in vitro, but not at physiological salt concentrations. There is no iron accumulation or oxidative stress defect in cyaY mutant or overproducing strains. cyaY is expressed, as measured using LacZ fusions (Trotot, 1996). A dubious 116 codon ORF named cyaX on the opposite strand of cyaY was dropped (Aiba, 1984). 	b3807
fliG	flaAII.2, flaBII	flagellar motor switching and energizing component	Structural component; Surface structures	Rotor protein for flagellar motor switching and energizing; role in flagellar assembly	FliGMN switch complex on the rotor of the bacterial flagellum. FliG interacts with the stator protein MotA.	b1939
fliH	flaAII.3, flaBIII	negative regulator of FliI ATPase activity	Transport; Surface structures	Negative regulator of FliI ATPase activity; involved in flagellar assembly and export	Characterized primarily in Salmonella. Overexpression causes a decrease in the amount of biofilm formed and decreases motility.	b1940
ybbA	None	putative ABC transporter ATPase	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative ABC transporter ATPase	2/15 YbbA peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed (Maillet, 2007).	b0495
uidB	gusB, uidP	glucuronide transporter	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	Inactive beta-glucuronide permease	Transport activity is enhanced by putative porin UidC. Overexpressed protein using native RBS signals from the non K-12 natural isolate CE1 was verified by N-terminal sequence. The CE1 allele is an active inner membrane glucuronide permease, but the K-12 allele has been reported to be inactive due to a P100L mutation (Liang, 2005). Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS).	b1616
yedD	None	lipoprotein	Null	Novel verified lipoprotein, function unknown	The first 15 aa of YedD are a type II signal peptide.	b1928
yedE	None	UPF0394 family sulphur transport domain-containing inner membrane protein	Putative transport; Not classified	UPF0394 family sulphur transport domain-containing protein; inner membrane protein, function unknown	The yedEF promoter region binds FNR and yedEF expression is repressed by FNR (Federowicz, 2014). YedE contains two sulphur transport domains (Pfam PF04143) formerly referred to as DUF395 domains. YedE is encoded in an operon with predicted sulfurtransferase YedF. 	b1929
yedF	None	putative TusA family sulfurtransferase	Null	Predicted TusA family sulfurtransferase	The yedEF promoter region binds FNR and yedEF expression is repressed by FNR (Federowicz, 2014). tusA, yedF and yeeD are paralogs.	b1930
slyD	None	FKBP-type peptidyl prolyl cis-trans isomerase (rotamase)	Enzyme; Proteins - translation and modification	FKBP-type peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase; metal ion regulated; overexpression causes filamentation; required to stabilize E lysis protein of bacteriophage phiX174	HypB requires binding of SlyD for hydrogenase activity as SlyD helps facilitate nickel insertion. Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004). SlyD has a histidine-rich, nickel-binding region, so it is a common contaminant in protein purification of His-tagged proteins (Parsy, 2007). SlyD is a a heat-shock protein that facilitates folding and enhances the solubilty of aggregation-prone proteins (Han, 2007). SlyD is required for MazF-mediated cell death after either DNA damage or inhibition of translation (Amitai, 2009).	b3349
slyX	None	phi X174 lysis protein	Null	Required for phi X174 lysis	Null	b3348
bacA	uppP	undecaprenyl pyrophosphate phosphatase	Putative transport; Drug/analog sensitivity	Undecaprenyl pyrophosphate phosphatase; BacA(UppP)	Overexpression of bacA confers bacitracin resistance (Cain, 1993). Purified BacA has undecaprenyl pyrophosphate phosphatase (UppP) activity, not the previously hypothesized undecaprenol phosphokinase activity; as bacA was the first of four UppP-encoding genes characterized, it was proposed to be renamed uppP which is retained as a synonym (Cain, 1993; El Ghachi, 2004). BacA(UppP) encodes 75% of the cell's UppP activity; the bacA gene is not essential, but UppP activity is essential to synthesize undecaprenyl phosphate, a C55 lipid carrier for cell wall synthesis, so a ybjG pgpB bacA triple mutant of three UppP-encoding genes is lethal; overexpression, but not wildtype levels, of the LpxT(YeiU) undecaprenyl pyrophosphate:lipid A 1-phosphate phosphotransferase activity rescues the triple mutant (El Ghachi, 2004; El Ghachi, 2005). YbjG and BacA are not involved in lipid A modification (Touze, 2008).	b3057
moaC	None	molybdopterin biosynthesis, protein C	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Molybdopterin	MPT (molybdopterin ) biosynthesis; chlorate resistance protein C	Null	b0783
atoS	None	sensory histidine kinase in two-component regulatory system with AtoC	Regulator; Not classified	Transcriptional histidine protein kinase regulator of atoDAEB; membrane sensor; AtoC is the two-component cognate response regulator; induced by acetoacetate	Null	b2219
atoC	Az	fused response regulator of ato operon, in two-component system with AtoS: response regulator/sigma54 interaction protein	Regulator; Degradation of small molecules: Fatty acids	Response regulator for atoDAEB operon; AtoS is the two-component cognate sensor protein; induced by acetoacetate; ornithine decarboxylase antizyme Az, polyamine-inducible	Bifunctional bacterial antizyme AtoC(Az) binds to and inhibits ornithine decarboxylase. AtoCS mutants have lowered complexed poly-(R)-3-hydroxybutyrate (cPHB) levels: the ato operon is required for maximal cPHB production (Theodoroua, 2006).	b2220
atoD	None	acetyl-CoA:acetoacetyl-CoA transferase, alpha subunit	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Fatty acids	Acetyl-CoA:acetoacetyl-CoA transferase beta-subunit	Null	b2221
atoA	None	acetyl-CoA:acetoacetyl-CoA transferase, beta subunit	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Fatty acids	Acetate CoA-transferase	Null	b2222
atoE	None	short chain fatty acid transporter	Transport; Degradation of small molecules: Fatty acids	Short-chain fatty acids transporter	IT (Ion Transporter) superfamily (Prakash, 2003). ST(3) structural class based on hydropathy profile (Lolkema, 2003).	b2223
atoB	None	acetyl-CoA acetyltransferase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Fatty acids	Acetyl-CoA acetyltransferase	Null	b2224
folB	ygiG	dihydroneopterin aldolase and dihydroneopterin triphosphate 2'-epimerase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Dihydroneopterin aldolase	The N-terminal sequence of native FolB(YgiG) is MDIVFIEQL (Jeff Green, personal comm.)	b3058
plsY	ygiH	putative glycerol-3-phosphate acyltransferase	Null	Probable glycerol-3-phosphate acyltransferase	Homologous to the PlsY glycerol-3-phosphate acyltransferase (UniProtKB: P0A4Q0) of S. pneumoniae, which identifies a function for the UPF0078 family (COG0344). S. pneumoniae PlsX and PlsY work together as a two-step glycerol-3-phosphate acylation, the first step in phosphatidic acid synthesis, an intermediate in phospholipid synthesis (Lu, 2006). PlsXY homologs are present in E. coli, but PlsXY cannot substitute for the single step reaction catalyzed by the essential PlsB even on plasmids, although S. pneumoniae plsXY can plasmid rescue E. coli plsB null mutants (Yoshimura, 2007). plsY(ygiH) and plsX are synthetic lethals (i.e. they cannot be simultaneously deleted) and plsB overexpression permits growth of the plsXY double mutant (Yoshimura, 2007).	b3059
panB	panA(S.t.)	3-methyl-2-oxobutanoate hydroxymethyltransferase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Pantothenate	Ketopantoate hydroxymethyltransferase	The original "panA" mutation pan-6 in Salmonella was found to be an allele of panB (Cronan, 1982).	b0134
hslV	clpQ, htpO, yiiC	peptidase component of the HslUV protease	Enzyme; Degradation of proteins, peptides, glyco	Heat-inducible ATP-dependent protease HslVU, protease subunit; involved in the degradation of misfolded proteins	Null	b3932
modF	chlD, phrA	molybdate ABC transporter ATPase	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Anions	Molybdate ABC transporter ATPase	modF mutants are unable to reduce selenate.	b0760
yadC	None	putative fimbrial-like adhesin protein	Putative structural component; Surface structures	FimA homolog; lethality reduction protein	Mutations in yadC have a hyperlethality phenotype when cells are stressed; YadC is a protein that reduces the lethal effects of stress (Han, 2010). YadC is one of 25 FimA homologs in E. coli K-12. The first 23 aa of YadC are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b0135
aas	None	fused 2-acylglycerophospho-ethanolamine acyl transferase/acyl-acyl carrier protein synthetase	Enzyme; Fatty acid and phosphatidic acid biosynthesis	Acyl-ACP synthase; 2-acylglycerophosphoethanolamine acyltransferase; salvage pathway for reacylation; inner membrane; bifunctional for turnover/incorporation	Null	b2836
lptB	yhbG	lipopolysaccharide export ABC transporter ATPase	Putative transport; Not classified	LPS export ABC transporter ATPase	An LptBFGC protein complex has been identified (Narita, 2009). LptB depletion results in rifampicin/bile salts sensitivity, indicative of an outer membrane integrity defect (Sperandeo, 2006). lptB has been found to be an essential gene based on LptB depletion experiments indicating arabinose-dependent growth of an upstream minitransposon insertion with an arabinose-inducible outward promoter (Sperandeo, 2006). The lptB mutants in the Keio collection have been shown to harbor an intact copy of lptB in addition to the deletion allele (Yamamoto, 2009). lptAB expression is RpoE-dependent (Sperandeo, 2007). Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004).	b3201
hpf	yhbH	ribosome hibernation promoting factor HPF; stabilizes 100S dimers	Putative regulator; Global regulatory functions	Ribosome hibernation promoting factor HPF; stabilizes 70S dimers (100S); induced in stationary phase; raiA paralog has opposite effect on 70S dimers	Homologous to RpoN modulators. Induced by AI-2 pheromone. The rpoN operon contains rpoN-hpf-ptsN-yhbJ-npr.	b3203
ptsN	rpoP, yhbI	sugar-specific enzyme IIA component of PTS	Enzyme; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	Nitrogen regulatory protein, PTS system EIIA(Ntr) component	Although ptsN was predicted to have a sigma 28 (FliA) promoter, it can not be transcribed in vitro with sigma 28 holoenzyme (Yu, 2006). The rpoN operon contains rpoN-hpf-ptsN-yhbJ-npr. ptsN is a multicopy suppressor of rpoE mutant lethality (Hayden, 2008). Dephosphorylated PTS system EIIA(Ntr) protein PtsN binds to and stimulates sensor kinase KdpD activity, increasing the levels of the cognate phosphorylated response regulator KdpE (Luttman, 2009). RpoE regulon. 5/28 PtsN peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed; 4/28 peptide masses indicate that occasionally the initial Met is not removed (Maillet, 2007). In E. coli strains with a functional ilvG, no ptsN nutrient phenotypes are seen, indicating that perhaps ptsN is not an organic nitrogen source regulator (Reaves, 2011; Ninfa, 2011).	b3204
yicG	None	UPF0126 family inner membrane protein	Null	Inner membrane protein, UPF0126 family, function unknown	Null	b3646
yicH	None	putative inner membrane-anchored periplasmic AsmA family protein	Null	Putative inner membrane-anchored AsmA family protein; periplasmic; function unknown	Although no association of AsmA with the OM was detected, AsmA superfamily members YhjG and YicH (but not AsmA itself) were predicted to be beta-barrel proteins indicating that the inner membrane-anchored AsmA family proteins may also insert into the outer membrane, consistent with their putative role in OM protein assembly and OM maintenance (Zhai, 2009). SignalP and TMHMM indicate a single N-terminal transmembrane segment of YicH may serve as a signal anchor.	b3655
yicI	None	putative alpha-glucosidase	Null	Alpha-xylosidase; hexameric	YicI may be part of sugar catabolism system with upstream gene product YicJ. Substitutions C307I/F308D convert YicI from alpha-xylosidase to alpha-glucosidase. Glycoside hydrolase family 31.	b3656
yicJ	None	putative transporter	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative sugar transporter, function unknown	YicJ is a possible sugar transporter for the YicI substrates. yicJ is possibly in a operon with downstream yicI. Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS).	b3657
setC	yicK	putative arabinose efflux transporter	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative arabinose efflux transporter	SetC is a putative arabinose efflux transporter because a setC mutant has an increased intracellular concentration of arabinose but not xylose; in addition overexpression of SetC reduced the intracellular concentration of arabinose but not xylose; other sugars were not tested (Koita, 2012). SetC is predicted to be a sugar efflux transporter because it is a paralog of SetA and SetB. Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS).	b3659
yicL	None	EamA family inner membrane putative transporter	Putative transport; Not classified	EamA family inner membrane predicted transporter; function unknown	YicL has two EamA/RhaT transporter family domains (Pfam PF00892). YicL is an inner membrane protein with ten transmembrane helicies and the C-terminus in the cytoplasm (Daley, 2005).	b3660
nepI	gaiA(S.t.), yicM	putative transporter	Putative transport; Not classified	Purine ribonucleoside exporter; 6-mercaptopurine resistance	Overexpression of nepI increases resistance to inosine and guanosine. Salmonella gaiA(nepI) is required for triggering apoptosis and bacterial survival in murine macrophages. Pathogenicity island eip (EAEC strain 042) has inserted in the yicS-nepI intergenic region. Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS).	b3662
yicN	None	DUF1198 family protein	Null	DUF1198 family protein, function unknown	Null	b3663
adeQ	pbuA, yicO	adenine permease, high affinity; adenine:H+ symporter	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Nucleosides, purines, pyrimidines	Adenine permease, high affinity	BaeSR regulon.	b3664
adeD	ade, adeC(B.s.), adu, yicP	cryptic adenine deaminase	Putative enzyme; Purine ribonucleotide biosynthesis	Cryptic (or inducer-unknown) adenine deaminase; can be activated by hns mutation or IS elements; adenine aminohydrolase	The divergent yicO and ade genes may be co-regulated: the genes are also adjacent in Klebsiella and Serratia but are co-directional in an apparent operon arrangement; this difference may reflect horizontal acquisition of ade. otherPDB (A. tumefaciens): 3NQB.	b3665
emrD	yicQ	multidrug efflux system protein	Transport; Drug/analog sensitivity	Multidrug resistance pump; overexpression resistance to uncouplers and detergents	EmrD may be an arabinose efflux transporter because an emrD mutant has increased intracellular arabinose, but not xylose; other compounds were not tested (Koita, 2012). Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS).	b3673
yidF	None	putative Cys-type oxidative YidJ-maturating enzyme	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Predicted oxidative YidJ-maturating enzyme, Cys-type	YidF is predicted to be an oxidative maturating enzyme responsible for the conversion of Cys52 to 3-oxoalanine in the predicted cytoplasmic sulfatase/phosphatase superfamily enzyme YidJ (Schirmer, 1998). YidF is homologous to the two predicted anaerobic sulfatase-maturating (anSME) Radical SAM enzymes AslB and YdeM, but is missing the two N-terminal Radical SAM iron-sulfer clusters and has a variant of the C-terminal iron-sulfer SPASM domain. 3-oxoalanine is also known as Calpha-formylglycine (FGly).	b3674
yidG	None	inner membrane protein	Null	Function unknown	Null	b3675
yidH	None	DUF202 family inner membrane protein	Null	Inner membrane protein, DUF202 family, function unknown	Although a wildtype strain was unaffected, a yidH deletion mutant exhibited less than 20% survival after 20 minutes in 2.5 mM hydrogen peroxide (Kri Ko, 2014). 	b3676
yidI	None	inner membrane protein	Null	Inner membrane protein, function unknown	Null	b3677
galM	None	aldose 1-epimerase; type-1 mutarotase; galactose mutarotase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	Aldose 1-epimerase, type-1 mutarotase; galactose mutarotase; monomeric	GalM substrates include D-galactose, D-glucose, D-xylose, D-fucose, L-arabinose, maltose and lactose. Some GalM activity is found in the periplasm. GalM N-terminal sequence demonstrates the initial Met is not cleaved, however the protein was overproduced using a vector-encoded RBS so it is not in the Verifeid Set (Bouffard, 1994). 8/175 GalM peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is not removed (Maillet, 2007).	b0756
gpmA	gpm	phosphoglyceromutase 1	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Glycolysis	Phosphoglycerate mutase, 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate-dependent; dPGM; Fur regulon; dimeric	Purified GpmA has 10-20 times higher specific actvity than GpmM (Fraser, 1999; Foster, 2010). gpmA mutants exhibit a long lag when overnight minimal medium-grown cells are plated on rich medium; gpmA or gpmM clones rescued the defect (Foster, 2010). GpmA does not have phosphatase activity against para-nitrophenyl phosphate (Foster, 2010). gpmM and gpmA are non-essential genes but phosphoglycerate mutase is an essential enzyme since a gpmA gpmM double mutation is lethal (Foster, 2010). GpmA is a member of the histidine phosphatase superfamily, represented by the InterPro superfamily profile IPR013078 and CDD cl11399 (also called the dPGM superfamily) including phosphatases and fructose 2,6-bisphosphatases as well as factor-dependent phosphoglycerate mutases; the histidine phosphatase superfamily is characterized by a conserved histidine that is transiently phosphorylated during the catalytic cycle (Fothergill-Gilmore, 1989; Fothergill-Gilmore, 1990; Jedrzejas, 2000; Johnsen, 2007; Rigden, 2008; Foster, 2010). HT_Cmplx25_Cyt: GpmA+GpmM.	b0755
pnuC	None	nicotinamide riboside transporter	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Nucleosides, purines, pyrimidines	Nicotinamide riboside uptake permease	E. coli PnuC is a nicotinamide riboside (NR) transporter that can import NR but not nicotinamide mononucleotide (NMN) when expressed in a Haemophilus influenzae pnuC mutant (Sauer, 2004). PnuC and NadR may constitute a two component group translocator whereby NadR has to phosphorylate NR to NMN to facilitate substrate release by PnuC into the cytoplasm. In Salmonella, PnuC was originally thought to import NMN directly, however it was subsequently shown to be an NR, not NMN, importer; a mutant form of PnuC was able to transport NMN directly; NMN is converted to NR in the Salmonella periplasm by AphA and this may also occur in E. coli (Foster, 1990; Grose, 2005). NadR regulon.	b0751
udk	uck	uridine-cytidine kinase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Nucleotide interconversions	Uridine-cytidine kinase; uridine kinase	Null	b2066
nudC	yjaD	NADH pyrophosphatase	Null	NADH pyrophosphatase	Null	b3996
acrA	lir, Mb, mbl, mtcA, nbsA, sipB	multidrug efflux system	Transport; Drug/analog sensitivity	AcrAB-TolC multidrug efflux pump; additionally dye, detergent, solvent resistance; membrane-fusion lipoprotein	acrA was first identified as an acridine sensitive mutation. acrA is a mutational suppressor of topA deletion inviability in low osmolarity medium. AcrA is attached to the inner membrane. acrA is an acrE paralog. AcrA is trimeric. Mar regulon. The first 24 aa of AcrA are a type II signal peptide.	b0463
acrB	acrE	multidrug efflux system protein	Transport; Drug/analog sensitivity	AcrAB-TolC multidrug efflux pump; additionally dye, detergent and solvent resistance; RND-type transporter	acrB is an acrF paralog. AcrB exists as a homotrimer. acrB is in the Mar regulon. HT_Cmplx27_Mem: AcrB+MdtF.	b0462
yidJ	None	sulfatase/phosphatase superfamily protein	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Predicted sulfatase/phosphatase superfamily enzyme, function unknown	YidJ is a sulfatase/phosphatase superfamily (InterPro IPR017850) member with a predicted 2-oxoalanine conversion at Cys52. The predicted 3-oxoalanine-containing members of the sulfatase/phosphatase superfamily include the known phosphonate monoester hydrolase/phosphodiesterase PehA (UniProt Q45087) from B. caryophilli (Dotson, 1996; Hanson, 2004). YidJ is more closely related to PehA (B. caryophilli) than to paralogs AslA and YdeN.	b3678
yidK	None	putative transporter	Putative transport; Not classified	Function unknown	Null	b3679
yidL	None	AraC family putative transcriptional regulator	Putative regulator; Not classified	Predicted transcriptional regulator, AraC family, function unknown	Null	b3680
glvG'	yidM, ysdC	pseudogene	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction, 6-phospho-beta-glucosidase; missing an internal gene fragment	The C-terminal 70 aa are found downstream and out-of-frame of the first 200 aa, missing about 170 aa internally (represented by an X in the protein sequence) as compared to GlvG (Z5177) of E. coli O157:H7.	b4556
glvC'	glvB, yidN, yidO	pseudogene, arbutin specific enzyme IIC component of PTS	Enzyme; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	Pseudogene reconstruction; putative arbutin-like PTS system enzyme IIB and IIC	Stop codon 369 is translated as an X in the reconstructed protein sequence. Intact glvC alleles are present in many E. coli genomes, e. g. O157:H7 Z5178, which have Q369.	b3683
yidP	None	UTRA domain-containing GntR family putative transcriptional regulator	Putative regulator; Not classified	Function unknown	Null	b3684
yidQ	ecfI	DUF1375 family outer membrane protein	Null	Probable lipoprotein, function unknown; Cys conserved	yceK and yidQ are paralogs. The first 20 aa of YidQ are a predicted type II signal peptide.	b3688
yidR	None	DUF3748 family protein	Null	DUF3748 family protein, function unknown	YidR has an N-terminal DUF3748 domain and a C-terminal COG4946 (TolB-like) domain. 14/132 YidR peptide masses from MS analysis are consistent with the use of this start codon, (Maillet, 2007). Although this longer version of YidR has experimental support, the ribosome binding site and conservation are not consistent with the choice of this start codon; an alternative start at ATG codon 11 is conserved and has a good RBS and could be the true start codon.	b3689
cbrA	yidS	colicin M resistance protein; FAD-binding protein, putative oxidoreductase	Null	Colicin M resistance protein; FAD-binding protein, predicted polyisoprenoid oxidoreductase	CbrA overexpression increases resistance to colicin M (Cma) and osmotic shock while a cbrA mutant is more sensitive to colicin M; purified CbrA has non-covalently bound FAD; CbrA may modify the Colicin M substrate, the C55 polyisoprenyl-PP- 525 MurNAc(pentapeptide)-GlcNAc, rendering it resistant to cleavage by Colicin M but this could not be demonstrated in vitro probably due to the insoluble nature of isolated CbrA protein (Helbig, 2012). cbrA is in the creBC regulon and is induced by the AI-2 pheromone.	b3690
dgoT	yidT	D-galactonate transporter	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	D-galactonate transporter	Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS).	b3691
dgoA	yidU	2-oxo-3-deoxygalactonate 6-phosphate aldolase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	2-oxo-3-deoxygalactonate 6-phosphate aldolase	Null	b4477
dgoK	yidV	2-oxo-3-deoxygalactonate kinase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	2-oxo-3-deoxygalactonate kinase	Null	b3693
dgoR	yidW	D-galactonate catabolism operon transcriptional repressor	Null	Transcriptional repressor for the dgoRKADT operon; growth on 2-keto-3-deoxygalactonate; binds D-galactonate as an inducer	DgoR is a GntR-type DNA-binding transcriptional regulator for the D-galactonate utilization operon.	b4479
yidX	None	putative lipoprotein	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Probable lipoprotein, function unknown; Cys conserved	The first 23 aa of YidX are predicted to be a type II signal peptide.	b3696
mdtL	yidY	multidrug efflux system protein	Putative transport; Not classified	Multidrug resistance efflux protein; overexpression confers low-level chloramphenicol resistance	Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS).	b3710
yidZ	None	putative DNA-binding transcriptional regulator	Putative regulator; Not classified	Nitric oxide resistance, LysR-family transcriptional regulator	yidZ is induced by NO. 	b3711
yieE	None	phosphopantetheinyl transferase superfamily protein	Null	Phosphopantetheinyl transferase superfamily, function unknown	YieE is related to the Sfp COG2091 branch of the phosphopantetheinyl transferase superfamily; its putative apo-protein substrate is unknown. The yieE-chrR operon promoter region binds ArcA and ArcA represses yieE-chrR expression (Federowicz, 2014).	b3712
chrR	yieF	chromate reductase, Class I, flavoprotein	Null	Chromate reductase, Class I, flavoprotein; quinone reductase; chromate resistance; reduces mitomycin C; prodrug reducing enzyme	YieF was renamed as ChrR and is both a chromate and uranyl reductase; a Y128N mutation improves the metal reduction activity of ChrR making it more useful as a bioremediation agent (Barak, 2006). The physiological role of ChrR may be due to its quinone reductase activity. The chrR(yieF) mutant enzyme Y6 kills HeLa spinner cells. The yieE-chrR operon promoter region binds ArcA and ArcA represses yieE-chrR expression (Federowicz, 2014).	b3713
adeP	purP, yieG	adenine permease, high affinity; adenine:H+ symporter	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Nucleosides, purines, pyrimidines	Adenine permease, high affinity	A clone of adeP(purP) was isolated as a multicopy suppresssor of a lethal yjeE deficiency (Handford, 2009). adeP(purP) is in the PurR regulon (Marbach, 2012).	b3714
yieH	None	phosphoenolpyruvate and 6-phosphogluconate phosphatase	Enzyme; Not classified	Phosphoenolpyruvate and 6-phosphogluconate phosphatase; weak phosphoramidase; physiological role unknown; HAD3	HAD superfamily. YieH is also a nucleotidase hydrolyzing purines and pyrimidines as secondary substrates; in vitro activities demonstrated by Kuznetsova et al. (2005, 2006).	b3715
cbrB	yieI	PRK09823 family inner membrane protein, creBC regulon	Null	PRK09823 family inner membrane protein, creBC regulon	Null	b3716
cbrC	yieJ	UPF0167 family protein	Null	Required for colicin E2 tolerance; UPF0167 family	A cbrC(yieJ) mutant is hypersensitive to colicin E2; overproduction of CbrC(YieJ) increases colicin E2 tolerance (Cariss, 2010). CbrC(YieJ) has been predicted to have thiol-disulfide oxidoreductase activity similar to that of the glutaredoxin/thioredoxin family (Fetrow, 1998).	b3717
yieK	None	putative 6-phosphogluconolactonase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Function unknown, bgl operon; glucosamine-6-phosphate isomerase homolog	yieK is co-expressed with the upstream bglGFBH operon	b3718
yieL	None	putative xylanase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Function unknown, bgl operon; endo-1,4-beta-xylanase homolog	yieL is co-expressed with the upstream bglGFBH operon. Related to peptidase S9 family; not in MEROPS, but it has homologs.	b3719
viaA	yieD, yieM	stimulator of RavA ATPase activity; von Willebrand factor domain protein	Null	Stimulator of RavA ATPase activity, VWA domain protein	ViaA stimulates RavA ATPase 2-fold in vitro (Snider, 2006). ViaA contains a Von Willebrand Factor Type (VWA) domain with a MIDAS site probably mediating the protein-protein interaction with RavA. viaA is in an rpoS-regulated operon with ravA. viaA(yieM)utants have elevated OM vesiculation (McBroom, 2006). The kup-ravA,viaA divergent operon promoter region binds FNR and ravA-viaA operon expression is activated by FNR (Federowicz, 2014).	b3745
ravA	yieN	hexameric AAA+ MoxR family ATPase, putative molecular chaperone	Putative regulator; Not classified	Hexameric AAA+ MoxR family ATPase, function unknown; possible molecular chaperone; ATPase stimulated by binding to CadA and ViaA	ravA is in an rpoS-regulated operon with viaA. The AAA+ MoxR family protein RavA ATPase in vitro activity is stimulated two-fold by binding the adjacent VWA domain protein ViaA; RavA may be a molecular chaperone (Snider, 2006). RavA has a C-terminal DUF3763 domain of unknown function. Cytoplasmic protein. 12/75 RavA(YieN) peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed (Maillet, 2007). The kup-ravA,viaA divergent operon promoter region binds FNR and ravA-viaA operon expression is activated by FNR (Federowicz, 2014).	b3746
hsrA	yieO	putative multidrug or homocysteine efflux system	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative transporter, blocks RspA-mediated RpoS down-regulation; membrane protein	HsrA overexpression causes homocysteine accumulation due to MetE inhibition and methionine auxotrophy in absense of cobalamin; no overexpression were resistances found. Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS).	b3754
yieP	None	putative transcriptional regulator	Null	Function unknown, GntR-type transcriptional regulator	Null	b3755
phoH	psiH	ATP-binding protein; putative PhoH family P-loop ATPase	Regulator; Central intermediary metabolism: Phosphorus compounds	Phosphate starvation-inducible ATP-binding protein; predicted PhoH family P-loop ATPase; function unknown	Pho regulon. Purified PhoH binds ATP (Kim, 1993). phoH is induced by phosphate starvation (Metcalf, 1990).	b1020
efeB	ycdB	deferrrochelatase, periplasmic	Null	Deferrrochelatase, periplasmic; inactive acid inducible low-pH ferrous ion transporter EfeUOB; periplasmic acid peroxidase; heme cofactor	The EfeB structure complexed with heme in PDB:3O72 is derived from E. coli O157 but differs from K-12 EfeB by only one residue, F416L (Liu, 2011). The acquisition of iron from exogenous heme when the foreign heme receptor HasR is expressed is reduced in an efeB or yfeX single mutant and eliminated in an efeB yfeX double mutant; overproduced EfeB complements a yfeX mutation, indicating some cytoplasmic activity of EfeB; the Dpp dipeptide/heme permease is required since the utilization of iron extracted from heme by EfeB in the periplasm requires an active EfeUOB iron transporter; iron is extracted without rupturing the tetrapyyrol ring; EfeB and YfeX facilitate the conversion of heme to protoporphyrin IX (PPIX) (Letoffe, 2009). The EfeUOB tripartite iron transporter is silent in E. coli K-12 due to a mutation in EfeU (Cao, 2007). False positive lipoprotein prediction, Cys not conserved. Verified Tat substrate: EfeB has a Tat/Sec (Class II) 35 aa signal peptide (Tullman-Ercek, 2007). The first 35 aa of EfeB have been confirmed as a type I signal peptide by electrospray MS of the intact periplasmic protein (Sturm, 2006). efeUOB of K-12 are transcribed as an iron-depletion-inducible, Fur-dependent operon (McHugh, 2003; Grosse, 2006). yfeX and efeB are paralogs and representatives of the DyP-type peroxidase family.	b1019
gmhB	gmbC, gmbX, gmhX(N.m.), wcbN, yaeD	D,D-heptose 1,7-bisphosphate phosphatase	Enzyme; Surface polysaccharides and antigens	Heptose 1,7-bisphosphate phosphatase; LPS biosynthesis; HAD20	HAD superfamily. GmhB also has fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase actvity in vitro (Kuznetsova, 2006).	b0200
metI	metD, yaeE	DL-methionine transporter subunit	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	ABC transporter permease, L,D-methionine uptake; methionine sulfoximine sensitivity	Null	b0198
rsd	yjaE	stationary phase protein, binds sigma 70 RNA polymerase subunit	Regulator; Not classified	Regulates RNA polymerase holoenzyme formation; interacts with free sigma 70 and core RNA polymerase; stationary phase protein; anti-sigma	Null	b3995
nfrB	None	bacteriophage N4 receptor, inner membrane subunit	Membrane; Phage-related functions and prophages	Phage N4 susceptibility; membrane protein	Null	b0569
nfrA	None	bacteriophage N4 receptor, outer membrane subunit	Membrane; Phage-related functions and prophages	Bacteriophage N4 adsorption protein A, outer membrane protein; TPR repeat protein	The first 27 aa of NfrA are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b0568
acrS	envR, yhdK	acrAB operon transcriptional repressor	Regulator; Not classified	Transcriptional repressor of the acrAB operon	AcrS(EnvR) is a transcriptional repressor of the acrAB operon (Hirakawa). TetR family.	b3264
yddA	None	putative multidrug ABC transporter permease/ATPase	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative ABC transporter permease/ATPase	Null	b1496
yddB	None	putative TonB-dependent outer membrane receptor	Null	Putative TonB-dependent outer membrane receptor; function unknown	The first 19 aa are a weakly predicted type I signal peptide.	b1495
pqqL	pqqE, pqqM, yddC	putative periplasmic M16 family zinc metalloendopeptidase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Predicted periplasmic zinc metalloendopeptidase, function unknown; M16 protease family; induced by AI-2 pheromone	The first 26 aa of PqqL are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. PqqL, PtrA and YhjJ belong to the M16 zinc metalloendopeptidase family. PqqL has two M16 protease two-domain modules, the first module has an N-terminal M16 domain (PF000675), including the HXXEH consensus active site, and a structurally homologous C-terminal M-16 inactive domain (PF05193); the second module has a highly degenerate N-terminal M16-like domain that has lost the HXXEH consensus active site and has a C-terminal M-16 inactive domain (PF05193) (K.E.R.).	b1494
panC	None	pantothenate synthetase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Pantothenate	Pantothenate synthase, dimeric	12/168 PanC peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is not removed (Maillet, 2007). This PanC N-terminus, with Met, was verified by MS/MS sequencing (Tao, 2009).	b0133
panD	None	aspartate 1-decarboxylase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Pantothenate	Aspartate 1-decarboxylase; pantothenate biosynthesis; residues 1-24 constitute the beta chain; C-terminal 102 residues constitute the alpha chain	Aspartate decarboxylase activity synthesizing beta-alanine was confirmed in K-12 when it was first shown to be PanD (Cronan, 1980). panD mutants have two- to threefold elevated intracellular coenzyme A pools when grown in media high in pantothenate or beta-alanine (Cronan, 1982). panD mutants have reduced intracellular coenzyme A pools when the media is depleted of beta-alanine (Jackowski, 1983). PanD is autocleaved into two subunits; the N-terminal serine of the mature PanD alpha subunit is modified to pyruvic acid and involved in catalysis (van Poelje, 1990; Ramjee, 1997; Albert, 1998; Schmitzberger, 2003). Genetically replacing the modified Ser25 with an alanine inactivates PanD (Kennedy, 2004). Monomeric PanM binds to tetrameric PanD and accelerates PanD self-activation by autocleavage at Ser25 in vivo and in vitro; plasmid overexpression of panD overcomes the pantothentate requirement of panM mutants; PanM(PanZ) was initially characterized in Salmonella and subsequently characterized in E. coli (Stuecker, 2012a; Stuecker, 2012b; Nozaki, 2012).	b0131
yadD	None	transposase_31 family protein	Null	Transposase_31 family protein, function unknown	Although yadD was predicted to have a sigma 28 (FliA) promoter, it can not be transcribed in vitro with sigma 28 holoenzyme (Yu, 2006).	b0132
yadE	None	putative polysaccharide deacetylase lipoprotein	Null	Polysaccharide deacetylase-like protein, function unknown	YadE has a predicted 19 aa signal peptide.	b0130
yhgA	None	transposase_31 family protein	Null	Transposase_31 family protein, function unknown	Null	b3411
otsA	pexA	trehalose-6-phosphate synthase	Enzyme; Osmotic adaptation	Trehalose phosphate synthase; cold- and heat- induced; required for viability at 4C; rpoS regulon	Null	b1896
otsB	otsP	trehalose-6-phosphate phosphatase, biosynthetic	Enzyme; Osmotic adaptation	Trehalose phosphate phosphatase; cold- and heat- induced; required for viability at 4C; rpoS regulon; HAD17	HAD superfamily.	b1897
chaA	None	calcium/sodium:proton antiporter	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Cations	Ca2+/H+ and K+/H+ antiporter; extrudes potassium ions, and also sodium ions at alkaline pH; regulated by osmolarity and pH	Null	b1216
setA	yabM	broad specificity sugar efflux system	Putative transport; Not classified	Broad specificity sugar efflux transporter	setA is induced by glucose-phosphate stress and is required for optimal recovery from glucose-phosphate stress but does not appear to export alpha-methyl glucoside under stress conditions (Sun, 2011). Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS).	b0070
hchA	gloC, yedU, yzzC	glyoxalase III and Hsp31 molecular chaperone	Null	Glyoxalase III and molecular chaperone Hsp31, heat-inducible; weak aminopeptidase activity; homodimeric	Hsp31(HchA) is glyoxalase III, which catalyzes a cofactor-independent conversion of methylglyoxal to D-lactate (Misra, 1995; Subedi, 2011). Glyoxalase III (HchA) is a stationary phase enzyme regulated by RpoS (Benov, 2004). Hsp31(HchA) chaperone activity is inhibited at high temperature by ATP. HchA is involved in the processing of 8-12mer peptides in vivo. HchA is a weak active site cysteine peptidase. HchA is a member of a family variously called the C56 peptidase family, the PfpI/HchA peptidase/chaperone family, or the DJ-1/PARK7 superfamily.	b1967
prpC	yahS, yzzD	2-methylcitrate synthase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	2-Methylcitrate synthase; propionate catabolism via 2-methylcitrate cycle, characterized primarily in Salmonella	Repressed during biofilm formation. Crp regulon. N-terminal protein sequencing of mature PrpC indicated that the first 17 aa were removed, although this could be the result of proteolysis diring protein purification (Patton, 1993).	b0333
tsaE	yjeE	tRNA(ANN) t(6)A37 threonylcarbamoyladenosine modification protein; ADP binding protein	Enzyme; tRNA modification	tRNA(NNU) t(6)A37 threonylcarbamoyladenosine modification; ADP binding protein	The modified tRNA nucleotide t(6)A37 is derived from the labile cyclized ct(6)A37 during extraction; the tRNA threonylcarbamoyladenosine dehydratase TcdA catalyzes the cyclization reaction (Miyauchi, 2013). TsaBCDE are necessary and sufficient for tRNA(NNU) t(6)A37 threonylcarbamoyladenosine modification in vitro (Deutsch, 2012). Depletion of YjeE causes a proportion of cells to be enlarged, with a peripheral distribution of DNA; the YjeE depletion phenotype is suppressed by multicopy clones of rstA (Handford, 2009). YeaZ interacts with YjeE and YgjD, preferring YgjD (Handford, 2009). yjeE is non-essential in the presence of multicopy rstA (Campbell, 2007). Weak ATPase activity has been demonstrated in H. influenzae, but not E. coli. YjeE binding to ADP has been demonstrated in E. coli. otherPDB (H. influenzae): 1FL9, 1HTW. UPF0079 family. 	b4168
nnr	yjeF	bifunctional NAD(P)H-hydrate repair enzyme; C-terminal domain ADP-dependent (S)-NAD(P)H-hydrate dehydratase and N-terminal domain NAD(P)H-hydrate epimerase	Enzyme; Not classified	Bifunctional NAD(P)H-hydrate repair enzyme; C-terminal domain ADP-dependent (S)-NAD(P)H-hydrate dehydratase and N-terminal domain NAD(P)H-hydrate epimerase	NAD(P)H-hydate is also known as NAD(P)HX. Nnr(YjeF) is responsible for the detoxification of hydrated NADH and NADPH; The C-terminal NnrD domain has the NAD(P)HX dehydratase activity and the N-terminal NAD(P)HX epimerase NnrE domain interconverts the R and S stereoisomers of NAD(P)H (Marbaix, 2011). The Nnr(YjeF) dehydratase has a two-fold higher catalytic efficiency with the (S)-NADPHX substate than the (S)-NADHX substrate (Marbaix, 2011). Insertions in nnr(yjeF) indicate this gene is non-essential. Nnr(YjeF) is homologous to B. subtilis YxkO which belongs to the UPF0031 family. otherPDB (B. subtilis): 1KYH. The unpublished crystal structure annotation (PDB id: 3RS8) for the Nnr(YjeF) ortholog from T. maritima also indicates Nnr(YjeF) has NAD(P)H-hydrate dehydratase activity, as uncovered using metabolite cocktail screening.	b4167
yciK	None	putative EmrKY-TolC system oxoacyl-(acyl carrier protein) reductase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	COG1028 family putative oxidoreductase	Null	b1271
ydcD	None	putative immunity protein for RhsE	Null	Putative immunity protein for RhsE	ydcD is downstream of the putative polymorphic toxin pseudogene rhsE' and therefore may encode a novel immunity protein (Zhang, 2012).	b1457
pptA	ydcE	4-oxalocrotonate tautomerase	Null	Phenylpyruvate tautomerase; other substrates are (p-hydroxyphenyl)pyruvate and 2-hydroxy-2,4-pentadienoate; homodimeric	Cleavage of PptA fMet was confirmed by mass spec: obs. MW = 8540. The N-terminal proline of PptA is presumed to be the catalytic base residue of the active site.	b1461
yibF	None	glutathione S-transferase homolog	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Function unknown, glutathione S-transferase homolog	Null	b3592
yibG	None	TPR-like repeat protein	Null	TPR-like repeat protein; putative secreted Rhs polymorphic toxin system immunity protein	The first 19 aa of YibG are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. 	b3596
yibH	None	putative membrane fusion protein (MFP) component of efflux pump	Putative membrane; Not classified	Function unknown; putative membrane fusion protein (MFP) component of efflux pump, signal anchor	Null	b3597
yibI	None	DUF3302 family inner membrane protein	Null	Inner membrane protein, DUF3302 family, function unknown	Null	b3598
rhsJ'	yibJ	Rhs-family protein	Null	Pseudogene, Rhs family	A stop codon at position 234 of rhsJ'(yibJ')is translated as an X for the reconstruction of this rhs family gene fragment.	b3595
yhhJ	None	putative ABC transporter permease	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative ABC transporter permease	The yhiI-rbbA-yhhJ operon encodes RbbA, an ABC transporter ATPase/permease fusion protein homolog that does not appear to be a transporter but rather is a ribosome-associated ATPase, and the YhiI membrane fusion efflux protein (MFP) homolog. The associations or roles, if any, that YhiI and YhhJ might have in RbbA function is unknown, but it is possible that YhiI-RbbA-YhhJ is or was an exporter. YadH, YbhR, YbhS, YhhJ, and the RbbA C-terminal domain are paralogous ABC2-membrane permease family members (pfam01061/COG0842). The yhiI-rbbA-yhhJ operon promoter region binds ArcA and ArcA activates yhiI-rbbA-yhhJ operon expression (Federowicz, 2014).	b3485
mnmH	selE, selU, ybbB	tRNA 2-selenouridine synthase, selenophosphate-dependent	Enzyme; tRNA modification	tRNA 2-selenouridine synthase, selenophosphate-dependent; tRNA U34 geranylation enzyme; replaces a sulfur atom in 2-thiouridine in tRNA with selenium; required for 5-methylaminomethyl-2-selenouridine synthesis	MnmH(Sel,YbbB) uses geranyl pyrophosphate to geranylate modified U34 in tRNA (Dumelin, 2012). MnmH(Sel,YbbB) add has a rhodanese domain.	b0503
ybbC	None	putative immunity protein 	Null	Putative NTF2 fold immunity protein for RhsD toxin	The ybbC gene is downstream of the rhsD predicted polymorphic toxin gene and ybbC is predicted to encode an immunity protein (Zhang, 2012). YbbC has a possibly false positive lipoprotein prediction, the putative lipidated Cys residue is not well conserved (Gonnet, 2004). ybbC and yhhH are paralogs.	b0498
ybbD'	None	pseudogene	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction, novel conserved family	YbbD is a member of conserved protein family of unknown function. The intact Salmonella homolog is STM3527 (SP: Q8ZLH3). A frameshift at codon 80 was hypothetically reconstructed. An intact allele from Shigella boydii (SBO_0403) allows identification of the frameshift mutation: a run of 8 Ts starting at codon 80 is a run of 7 Ts in K-12. SBO_0403 is also a pseudogene with a frameshift at codon 138. Intact 163 codon versions are present in E. coli strains E22, B7A, E110019 and 53638. A homolog in Delftia acidovorans confirms that this is a conserved protein sequence. ybbD is downstream of the rhsE' secreted polymorphic toxin pseudogene and therefore may encode a novel immunity protein for RhsE'. 	b0501
yafF'	None	pseudogene, H repeat-associated protein	Null	Pseudogene, C-terminal fragment, H repeat-associated protein	Full length paralogs YhhI and YdcC are putative transposases.	b4503
nuoM	nuoA	NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase, membrane subunit M	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Aerobic respiration	NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase subunit M, complex I; contains the ubiquinone-binding site, is homologus to antiporters, and is implicated in proton pumping	NuoM and NuoL are located at the distal end of the membrane arm. the redox centers are in the peripheral arm.	b2277
nuoF	nuoB	NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase, chain F	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Aerobic respiration	NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase subunit F, complex I; NADH dehydrogenase I	The 52 nt nuoF-nuoG intergenic mRNA region has a widely conserved RNA hairpin structure of nknown function termed "nuoG RNA" (Weinberg, 2010).	b2284
ybfE	None	LexA-regulated protein, CopB family	Null	CopB family protein, LexA-regulated; RHH superfamily, function unknown	The C-terminal domain of YbfE belongs to the ribbon-helix-helix RHH-1 family (CopB family, PF01402) which is part of the RHH superfamily (InterPro IPR010985), and the Met_repress clan (CL0057), of predicted small DNA-binding proteins including many predicted dimeric repressors found in phage and plasmid genomes, as well as the E. coli MetJ and NikR repressors and the DinJ and RelB toxin/repressors. The N-terminal dimerization domain of SeqA is also a member of the RHH superfamily. The N-terminal domain of YbfE is predicted to be disordered. LexA regulon.	b0685
ybfF	None	acyl-CoA esterase 	Null	Acyl-CoA esterase in vitro, function unknown; low abundance protein	Overexpression of YbfF allows growth on monomethyl succinate as a sole carbon source (Notebaart, 2014).	b0686
ybfG'	ybfH	pseudogene	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction, DUF2625 family	YbfG' was a member of the DUF2625 family of unknown function. An in-frame stop at codon 70 of ybfG' is replaced with an X in the reconstruction. An intact allele of ybfG' is found in E. coli 53638 as Ecol5_01004515 (Genbank gi:75511145). Additional intact alleles of ybfG' can be found in strains E. coli 101-1 and Shigella boydii Sb227 (UniProtKB: Q324L5 has the C-terminal 120 aa of YbfG). All three intact alleles of ybfG' have a Trp codon in place of the in-frame stop at codon 70. Most orthologs of ybfG' also have a Trp at position 70, but Burkholderia cepacia has Tyr70. The F. johnsoniae (UniProtKB: Q1XKB8) and S. coelicolor (UniProtKB: Q9RI76) orthologs have N-terminal extensions due to the annotation of non-conserved alternative initiation codons. The YbfG' pseudogene product has been reported to be down-regulated by beryllium, possibly expressing the N-terminal fragment which could be expressed, even if non-functional (Taylor-McCabe, 2006).	b0691
trmI	trmB?, yggH	tRNA m(7)G46 methyltransferase, SAM-dependent	Enzyme; tRNA modification	tRNA m(7)G46 methyltransferase, SAM-dependent; monomeric	yggH is renamed trmI in Björk and Hagervall's EcoSal Module 4.6.2. trmI is a non-essential gene. Although trmB was mapped to 6', trmI is at 66'; trmB may be regulator of the structural gene trmI, although it is also being used as a synonym of trmI(yggH).	b2960
yneO'	orfT, ydeK, ydeU	pseudogene, AidA homolog	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction, putative OM autotransporter adhesin; AidA homolog	YneO' is a pseudogene reconstruction of a frameshift that fuses ORFs ydeK and ydeU into a 1773 aa protein with an intact allele in E. coli strain SE11 (NCBI: 209912050). The frameshift reconstruction was to remove one G base after codon 1287 in a string of eight Gs. A TTG start at codon 34 of the previous 1806 aa YneO' is now used since it encodes an N-terminus that has a very good 28 aa Type I signal peptide prediction. The previous start gave a false positive lipoprotein prediction, the Cys was not conserved.	b4696
nrfA	None	nitrite reductase, formate-dependent, cytochrome	Carrier; Energy metabolism, carbon: Electron transport	Cytochrome c nitrite reductase, cytochrome c552, periplasmic; formate-dependent; required for NO synthesis	Null	b4070
smpB	smqB	tmRNA-binding trans-translation protein	Null	tmRNA RNA-binding protein; required for peptide-tagging trans-translation and association of tmRNA(SsrA) with ribosomes	otherPDB (A. aeolicus): 1P6V; 1K8H. otherPDB (T. thermophilus): 2OB7; 1J1H.	b2620
intA	intX, slpA	CP4-57 prophage; integrase	Phage or Prophage Related	Integrase gene, CP4-57 putative defective prophage	Null	b2622
grcA	yfiD	autonomous glycyl radical cofactor	Putative enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Autonomous glycine radical cofactor; can reactivate pyruvate formate lyase after oxidative stress; induced by low pH or propionate; pyruvate formate lyase homolog, spare part for PFL	GrcA(YfiD) is required for MazF-mediated cell death after either DNA damage or inhibition of translation (Amitai, 2009). A grcA(yfiD) mutant excretes increased levels of organic acids when grown under oxygen-starved conditions. Radical activation mediated by PflA; deactivation not mediated by AdhE. Regulated by FNR, ArcA and PdhR. HT_Cmplx8_Cyt: GrcA(YfiD)+PflB. HT_Cmplx9_Cyt: GrcA(YfiD)+TdcE.	b2579
yfiE	None	putative DNA-binding transcriptional regulator	Putative regulator; Not classified	LysR-family transcriptional regulator, function unknown	Null	b2577
yfiF	None	putative methyltransferase	Null	Predicted methyltransferase, function unknown; rlmB paralog; non-essential gene	 YfiF is a ribosome-associated protein (Jiang, 2007). The yfiF promoter region binds ArcA and ArcA activates yfiF expression (Federowicz, 2014).	b2581
gmd	yefA, yefN	GDP-D-mannose dehydratase, NAD(P)-binding	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Sugar-nucleotide biosynthesis, conversions	Fucose biosynthesis; GDP-D-mannose 4,6-dehydratase	HT_Cmplx41_Mem: Gnd+PepD.	b2053
wcaG	fcl, yefB	bifunctional GDP-fucose synthetase: GDP-4-dehydro-6-deoxy-D-mannose epimerase/ GDP-4-dehydro-6-L-deoxygalactose reductase	Null	NADPH-dependent GDP-L-fucose synthase, colanic acid synthesis; two step reaction at a single active site: GDP-4-keto-6-deoxy-D-mannose epimerase, then reductase	Null	b2052
wcaH	gmm, nudD, yefC	GDP-mannose mannosyl hydrolase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Sugar-nucleotide biosynthesis, conversions	GDP-mannose mannosyl hydrolase; homodimeric	Nudix hydrolase.	b2051
wcaI	yefD	putative glycosyl transferase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Putative colanic acid biosynthesis glycosyl transferase	Null	b2050
cmtB	tolM	putative mannitol-specific enzyme IIA component of PTS	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	Protein-N-phosphohistidine sugar P-transferase; enzyme III of PEP-PTS cryptic mannitol transport	Null	b2934
cmtA	None	putative mannitol-specific PTS IIB and IIC components	Enzyme; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	Similar to mannitol phosphotransferase enzymes	Null	b2933
ygdD	None	UPF0382 family inner membrane protein	Null	Inner membrane protein, UPF0382 family, function unknown	Null	b2807
rlmM	ygdE	23S rRNA C2498 2'-O-ribose methyltransferase, SAM-dependent	Enzyme; rRNA modification	23S rRNA C2498 2'-O-ribose methyltransferase, SAM-dependent	RlmM and RlmE(FtsJ) are paralogs of the Pfam PF01728 family.	b2806
gcvA	None	glycine cleavage system transcriptional activator; autorepressor	Regulator; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	Transcriptional activator for the gcv operon, glycine-induced	GcvA acts as repressor of the glycine cleavage system operon in the absence of glycine, probably antagonized by Crp. The GcvA repressor function is enhanced by exogenous purine addition and requires an interaction with GcvR. Glycine is a co-activator that binds to GcvR and disrupts the GcvA-GcvR interaction.	b2808
lplA	slr, yjjF	lipoate-protein ligase A	Enzyme; Macromolecule synthesis, modification: Lipoprotein	Lipoate-protein ligase A; selenolipoate resistant	LplA first activates lipoic acid with ATP to form lipoyl-AMP.	b4386
talA	None	transaldolase A	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Non-oxidative branch, pentose pathway	Transaldolase A; creBC regulon	Null	b2464
hofC	hopC, yacD	assembly protein in type IV pilin biogenesis, transmembrane protein	Putative transport; Not classified	Homologous to PilC of P. aeruginosa; function not established, insertion mutation gives no phenotype	Null	b0106
hybA	hydL	hydrogenase 2 4Fe-4S ferredoxin-type component	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Hydrogenase 2 component, periplasmic; possibly electron acceptor for hydrogenase 2 small subunit; probably binds 4 4Fe-4S clusters	Upregulated in biofilms; biofilm microarray result was validated with RT-PCR. Verified Tat substrate: HybA has a predicted Tat-only (Class I) 26 aa signal peptide.	b2996
hybB	None	putative hydrogenase 2 cytochrome b type component	Putative enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Hydrogenase 2 cytochrome b type component, probably	Null	b2995
hybC	None	hydrogenase 2, large subunit	Putative enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Hydrogenase-2 large subunit, periplasmic	HybC is co-exported bound to TAT substrate HybO. C-terminal cleavage. HT_Cmplx45_Mem: HflC+HybC+BamB.	b2994
hybD	None	maturation protease for hydrogenase 2	Putative enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Maturation endoprotease for Ni-containing hydrogenase 2	Null	b2993
hybE	None	hydrogenase 2-specific chaperone	Phenotype; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Hydrogenase 2-specific chaperone	Null	b2992
hybF	None	protein involved with the maturation of hydrogenases 1 and 2	Regulator; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Accessory protein required for the maturation of hydrogenases 1 and 2; may be involved in nickel incorporation	Paralogous to hypA, which may have a regulatory role.	b2991
hybG	None	hydrogenase 2 accessory protein	Phenotype; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Hydrogenase 2 accessory protein; chaperone-like function	N-terminal Met is presumed to be removed, exposing essential N-terminal Cys residue	b2990
yebE	None	DUF533 family inner membrane protein	Null	Inner membrane protein, DUF533 family, function unknown	Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004). 2/50 YebE peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed (Maillet, 2007).	b1846
yebF	None	extracellular Colicin M immunity family protein	Null	Extracellular Colicin M immunity family protein; function unknown	YebF is 29% identical to to Colicin M immunity protein (Cmi) present in some E. coli strains but not in K-12; Cmi has a DsbA-dependent disulfide bond and these two Cys residues are conserved in YebF (Cys35 and Cys108) (Gérard, 2011). YebF Cys35 has been shown to be fully oxidized in vivo, probably because it forms a disulphide bond with Cys108 (Leichert, 2008). YebF Cys35 is fully oxidized in vivo and Cys108 is 85% oxidized in vivo; Cys35-Cys108 of YebF form a DsbA-dependent disulphide bond (Vertommen, 2008). It is not known if YebF confers colicin immunity. YebF is secreted into the periplasm then exported into the medium across the OM in a porin-dependent manner; OmpF, OmpC, and OmpX are involved in YebF export; YebF interacts with OmpF and OmpC at their periplasmic face; the YebF NMR structure is similar to Cmi and is stabilized by a disulfide bond between Cys35 and Cys108 (Prehna, 2012). C-terminal fusions with YebG are exported, which is useful for exporting fusion proteins (Zhang, 2006; Fisher, 2011; Chen, 2012). The lipoprotein prediction is a proven false positive; the Cys is not conserved. First 21 aa are a cleaved signal peptide. First ATG has no RBS and is not conserved in Salmonella; second ATG has good RBS and was used to translate cloned yebF.	b1847
yebG	None	DNA damage-inducible protein regulated by LexA	Null	DNA damage-inducible gene, SOS regulon; requires H-NS and cAMP for induction	YebG family (PF07130).	b1848
purT	None	phosphoribosylglycinamide formyltransferase 2	Enzyme; Purine ribonucleotide biosynthesis	Glycinamide ribonucleotide transformylase (GART) 2, non-folate-requiring, purine synthesis	Null	b1849
gcvP	None	glycine decarboxylase, PLP-dependent, subunit P of glycine cleavage complex	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	Glycine dehydrogenase (decarboxylating)	Null	b2903
aidB	None	DNA alkylation damage repair protein; flavin-containing DNA binding protein, weak isovaleryl CoA dehydrogenase	Enzyme; DNA repair	DNA alkylation damage repair protein; flavin-containing DNA binding protein, weak isovaleryl CoA dehydrogenase	AidB has low level isovaleryl CoA dehydrogenase activity, binds flavin, and binds DNA (Rohankhedk, 2006). The C-terminal 100 aa domain of AidB preferentially binds its own promoter region in vitro and auto-represses in vivo (Rippa, 2010). AidB overexpression reduces nitrosoguanidine-induced alkylation mutagenesis (Landini, 1994). aidB is in the GadE regulon (Marbach, 2012). Ada regulon. aidB is induced by anaerobiosis and acetate, dependent on RpoS. AidB may bind DNA to protect it from alkylating agents; a substrate yielding a robust acyl dehydrogenase activity has yet to be found.	b4187
yjfC	None	ATP-Grasp family ATPase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	ATP-Grasp family ATPase, function unknown; helps mitigate tolC mutant defects	Gss, YgiC and YjfC are ATP-Grasp family proteins with ATPase activities, but only Gss has glutathionylspermidine synthase activity (Sui, 2012). YgiC and YjfC do not contain the CHAP amidase domain present in Gss. A mutant lacking ygiB, ygiC, yjfM, yjfC, and tolC has an exacerbated growth defect in mimimal medium and has increased antibiotic sensitivities relative to tolC-alone mutants; the phenotypic defects of the five gene deletion strain are complemented by a tolC plasmid; both the ygiBC and yjfMC deletions are needed to exacerbate the tolC phenotype indicating that YgiBC and YjfMC may have redundant functions; it is not known if all four genes need to be deleted to observe the tolC mutant phenotype exacerbations (Dhamdhere, 2010).	b4186
torA	None	trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO) reductase I, catalytic subunit	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Molybdoprotein trimethylamine N-oxide reductase	Verified Tat substrate: TorA has a Tat/Sec (Class II) 39 aa signal peptide (Tullman-Ercek, 2007).	b0997
torC	None	trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO) reductase I, cytochrome c-type subunit	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	c-Type cytochrome	Null	b0996
ispF	ygbB	2C-methyl-D-erythritol 2,4-cyclodiphosphate synthase	Null	2-C-methyl-D-erythritol 2,4-cyclodiphosphate (MECP) synthase; alternative nonmevalonate (DXP) pathway for terpenoid biosynthesis; essential gene; trimeric	Null	b2746
umpG	surE, ygbC	broad specificity 5'(3')-nucleotidase and polyphosphatase	Phenotype; Not classified	UMP phosphatase, nucleotidase, 5- or 3'-monophosphates; purine, pyrimidine, ribo- and deoxyribonucleotides all effectively hydrolyzed; short chain exopolyphosphatase	UmpG(SurE) is a broad substrate specificity phosphatase in vitro (Proudfoot, 2004). The UmpH(NagD) and UmpG(SurE) phosphatases degrade UMP to uridine in vivo (Reaves, 2013). A surE mutation is a specific suppressor of pcm stationary phase survival defects. The original surE mutant had a secondary rpoS mutation. The lack of survival in stationary phase was due to this cryptic rpoS mutation and clean surE mutants have no survival phenotype. SurE demonstrates nucleotidase preference for short chain substrates. otherPDB (T. maritima): 1J9J, 1J9K, 1J9L, 1ILV. 	b2744
stfE'	ycfE	pseudogene, e14 prophage; side tail fiber protein fragment family	Phage or Prophage Related	C-terminal Stf variable cassette, e14 prophage, pseudogene; alternate virion-host specificity protein; Tail Collar domain	stfE' is interrupted by a terminal 16 bp inverted repeat of the P(+) orientation P-element and is fused to the first 96 codons of stfP when the P-element is in the P(-) orientation (Plasterk, 1985).	b1157
purU	tgs, ychI	formyltetrahydrofolate hydrolase	Enzyme; Purine ribonucleotide biosynthesis	Formyltetrahydrofolate hydrolase; mutation causes transient glycine starvation	Null	b1232
yceI	None	periplasmic high pH-inducible lipid-binding protein	Null	Periplasmic high pH-inducible lipid-binding protein; dimeric	YceI was found in the periplasmic protein fraction and N-terminal sequencing demonstrated that a 22 amino acid signal peptide is cleaved from YceI (Link, 1997). The yceJI operon promoter region has an ArcA binding site (Federowicz, 2014). E. coli yceI is induced by high pH (Stancik, 2002). E. coli yceI is induced by NaCl osmotic stress (Weber, 2006). The E. coli YceI crystal structure includes a bound 2-octaprenylphenol molecule in a lipocalin-like fold (PDB: 1Y0G). Two yceI family members from B. cenocepacia, BCAL3310 and BCAL3311, encode secreted proteins that bind to polymixin B and confer resistance and heteroresistance (El-Halfawy, 2013). A crystal structure of the T. thermophilus YceI family member TT1927b has a bound polyprenyl pyrophosphate molecule; structure comparisons indicate that although structurally similar to OmpA YceI family proteins are not outer membrane proteins but are soluble proteins with hydrophobic cores binding lipid molecules (Handa, 2005). A crystal structure of the H. pylori YceI family member HP1286, which is low pH-inducible and secreted out to the medium, has a bound polyprenyl pyrophosphate molecule (Sisinni, 2010). The P. syringae PSPPH_4050-encoded YceI-like protein crystal structure includes a bound ubiquinone-8 molecule (PDB: 3Q34). The predicted presence of an antiparallel beta-barrel in YceI has led to its mischaracterization as an outer membrane protein (Yan, 2014).	b1056
amtB	ybaG	ammonium transporter	Putative transport; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	Ammonia gas channel; sequesters GlnK, a negative regulator of AmtB activity, to the inner membrane; bi-directional facilitated diffusion	AmtB is a trimeric inner membrane protein. Each subunit has 11 TM helices; a predicted N-terminal 12th TM helix is actually a cleaved signal peptide. Ammonium is proposed to bind to the periplasmic face of AmtB and then to be deprotonated to ammonia for diffusion through the AmtB channel, then reprotonated by water to hydrate the ammonia gas to ammonium ion in the cytoplasm. AmtB enables growth on ammonium as sole nitrogen source at low ammonium ion concentrations (Soupene, 1998). The human Rh proteins are AmtB homologs and have been variously proposed to act as ammonia channels or as carbon dioxide gas channels.	b0451
puuB	ordL, ycjA	gamma-glutamylputrescine oxidoreductase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Gamma-glutamylputrescine oxidoreductase; putrescine utilization pathway	Null	b1301
amiA	yfeE	N-acetylmuramoyl-l-alanine amidase I	Enzyme; Murein sacculus, peptidoglycan	N-acetylmuramyl-L-alanine amidase, periplasmic; role in septal cleavage during cell division; activated by EnvC	EnvC activates AmiA- and AmiB-mediated in vitro murein cleavage; cell lysis induced by EnvC overproduction requires expression of amiA or amiB (Uehara, 2010). AmiA is a verified Tat substrate (Bernhardt, 2003). AmiA has a predicted Tat-only (Class I) 34 aa signal peptide (Tullman-Ercek, 2007). In amiABC triple mutants, thickened dark bands termed septal peptidoglycan (SP) rings appear at division sites, representing a cell division structure that accumulates when septal synthesis and hydrolysis by the AmiABC amidases are uncoupled (Priyadarshini, 2007). A mutant lacking five murein hydrolases (amiABCmltCD=MHD90) has a delayed lysis phenotype after beta-lactam treatment (Heidrich, 2002).	b2435
yghB	None	general envelope maintenance protein; DedA family inner membrane protein	Membrane; inner membrane; cell division	General envelope maintenance protein, DedA family; inner membrane protein	A yqjA yghB double mutant is sensitive to biocides and cationic compounds known to be exported by multidrug efflux transporters MdfA, EmrE and Acr; this hypersensitivity is exacerbated by mutations in mdfA, emrE and acrB; all double mutant phenotypes are suppressed by an mdfA clone; E39 and D51 of YqjA and YghB are required for complementation of the drug-sensitivity phenotypes (Kumar, 2014). One of the redundant function proteins YqjA or YghB is required for general envelope maintenance and for PMF homeostasis under various growth conditions (Sikdar, 2012). A yqjA yghB double mutant has a membrane defect causing a cell division defect at low temperatures and an osmoremedial growth defect at elevated temperatures (Thomkins, 2008). DedA superfamily proteins YqjA and YghB likely have redundant functions since only a double mutant has defects; DedA superfamily members yabI or yohD can complement the yqjA yghB double mutant when overproduced, but a dedA clone cannot complement (Thompkins, 2008). Induced by AI-2 pheromone. A yqjA yghB double mutant is defective in the Tat-dependent export of AmiA and AmiC (Sikdar, 2009). A yqjA yghB double mutant is complemented by the sole dedA family gene in B. burgdorferi bb0250 (Liang, 2010). The E. coli K-12 DedA superfamily (SNARE associated Golgi protein/PF09335) has eight paralogs in two families, the COG0586 DedA/YghB family (including the DedA/YabI/YohD subfamily and the general envelope maintenance protein YghB/YqjA subfamily) and the YdjX family (including the COG0398 YdjX/YdjZ subfamily and the COG1238 YqaA subfamily) (Doerrler, 2013; K.E.R.). The yghB promoter region binds FNR and yghB expression is activated by FNR (Federowicz, 2014).	b3009
yddE	None	PhzC-PhzF family protein	Putative enzyme; Not classified	PhzC-PhzF family predicted enzyme, function unknown	3/30 YddE peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is not removed (Maillet, 2007).	b1464
etk	yccC	tyrosine-protein kinase, role in O-antigen capsule formation	Null	Tyrosine-protein kinase, required for O-antigen capsule formation; autokinase; polymyxin resistance	E. coli K-12 Etk is de-phosphorylated by the Etp phosphatase in vitro (Vincent, 2000). E. coli K-12 does not produce O-antigen capsule polysaccharide because the cryptic gfcABCDE-etp-etk operon is silenced by IS1D in the promoter region (Peleg, 2005). Etk is required for O-antigen capsule formation in enteropathogenic E. coli (EPEC) (Peleg, 2005). Partial phosphorylation of Etk Y574 has been experimentally confirmed by using 3,5-difluorotyrosine as a 19 F NMR probe; a proposed interaction between Y574 and R614 was confirmed (Li, 2013). Etp Y121 is shown to be phosphorylated by an unknown kinase, not Etk or Wzc (Nadler, 2012). The Etk paralog Wzc is autophosphorylated intra-molecularly at Y569 and inter-molecularly at Y708, Y710, Y711, Y713 and Y715, as experimentally demonstrated by site-directed mutagenesis and in vitro kinase assays; all six phosphorylated Wzc tyrosines are conserved in Etk (Y574, Y713, Y715, Y717, Y718 and Y720 (Grangeasse, 2002). A crystal structure of Etk did not show tyrosine phosphates due to rapid dephosphorylation during the sample preparation; structure-guided mutagenesis with enzymatic and phenotypic characterization of the K-12 Etk kinase supports a proposed Y574-R614 interaction and molecular switching mechanism (Lee, 2008). Experimental evidence and molecular dynamics simulations support the molecular switch interaction between Y574 and R614 and also identifies R572 as influencing the rotation of P-Y574 (Lu, 2009). Like its paralog Wzc, Etk is a membrane-bound protein with two transmembrane segments flanking a short N-terminal cytoplasmic region, a large periplasmic domain, and a large C-terminal catalytic cytoplasmic domain (Doublet, 2002; Daley, 2005). The O-antigen capsule is also known as the group 4 capsule (G4C).	b0981
rpiB	alsB, alsI, yjcA	ribose 5-phosphate isomerase B/allose 6-phosphate isomerase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Non-oxidative branch, pentose pathway	Ribose-5-phosphate isomerase B; allose-6-phosphate isomerase	Null	b4090
mobB	yihC	molybdopterin-guanine dinucleotide biosynthesis protein B	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Nucleotide interconversions	Molybdenum cofactor biosynthesis adaptor protein; dimeric	MobB has a weak intrinsic GTP-binding and GTPase activity that may be enhanced by interaction with MobA. MobB interacts with MobA, MogA and MoeA.	b3856
mobA	chlB, mob, narB	molybdopterin-guanine dinucleotide synthase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Molybdopterin	Molybdopterin guanine dinucleotide synthesis; chlorate resistance	Null	b3857
yihD	None	DUF1040 protein YihD	Null	DUF1040 family protein	Null	b3858
srkA	orfA, rdoA(S.t.), yihE	Cpx stress response Thr/Ser protein kinase; MazF antagonist protein	Null	Stress response kinase A, MazF antagonist; Thr/Ser kinase involved in Cpx stress response; lethality reduction protein	SrkA(YihE) is a Ser/Thr protein kinase that indirectly antagonizes the MazF endonuclease (it does not phosphorylate MazF), which is part of the MazEF toxin-antitoxin system implicated in stress-mediated programmed cell death and bacterial persistence (Dorsey-Oresto, 2013). srkA(yihE) is required for long-term cell survival and for the expression of surface appendages (Zheng, 2007). The SrkA(YihE) protein kinase may be involved in the regulation of the extracytoplasmic stress response in E. coli (Zheng, 2007). SrkA(YihE) was identified as a weakly expressed 39 kDa cytoplasmic protein in E. coli (Belin, 1994). The srkA(yihE) gene is involved in virulence of Shigella flexneri via its regulatory role of the gal operon during LPS synthesis; mutations in srkA(yihE) result in altered LPS structure (Edwards-Jones, 2004). SrkA(RdoA) is involved in relaying cpx-induced signals in Salmonella, where it was named rdoA (Suntharalingam, 2003). srkA(yihE) is in an operon with dsbA in E. coli, but not directly involved in disulfide bond formation (Belin, 1994). A transcript array in Shigella shows major changes in an srkA(yihE) deletion strain (Li, 2001). Mutations in srkA have a hyperlethality phenotype when cells are stressed; SrkA is a protein that reduces the lethal effects of stress (Han, 2010). Cpx regulon. 	b3859
yihF	None	DUF945 family protein	Orf; Not classified	DUF945 family protein	Null	b3861
yihG	None	inner membrane protein, inner membrane acyltransferase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Predicted acyltransferase, inner membrane protein, function unknown	YihG was originally characterized as poly(A) polymerase II, but this claim has been contradicted. RpoS regulon.	b3862
yihI	None	activator of Der GTPase	Null	Activator of Der GTPase; GAP (GTPase Activating Protein)-like protein; Der-YhiI complex	YihI stimulates Der GTPase, possibly acting as a negative regulator of 50S ribosome assembly and retarding early exponential growth (Hwang, 2010). yihI is negatively regulated by RpoS in stationary phase. Der and YihI form a complex, as does Der-delta200 (lacking the N-terminal 200 aa domain of Der) and YihI-delta45 (lacking the N-terminal 45 amino acids of YihI) (Kobayashi, 2009; Hwang, 2010). YihI belongs to the UPF0241 family. Purified YhiI forms a dimer (Hwang, 2010). Both Der GTP-binding domains must bind GTP for viability and ribosome-binding (Hwang, 2006; Bharat, 2006; Tomar, 2009) The YhiI stimulation of Der GTPase activity requires both Der Ser16 and Ser216, indicating both Der GTP-binding domain activities are required for Der GTPase activity (Hwang, 2010).	b3866
hemN	yihJ	coproporphyrinogen III oxidase, SAM and NAD(P)H dependent, oxygen-independent	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Heme, porphyrin	Coproporphyrinogen III oxidase, oxygen-independent, required for cytochrome B and cytochrome C synthesis during anaerobic growth	Radical SAM superfamily.	b3867
typA	bipA, yihK	GTP-binding protein	Putative factor; Not classified	GTPase, regulatory, ribosome-associated	Null	b3871
yihL	None	putative DNA-binding transcriptional regulator	Putative regulator; Not classified	Predicted DNA-binding transcriptional regulator	Null	b3872
yihM	None	putative sugar phosphate isomerase	Null	Predicted sugar phosphate isomerase, function unknown	Null	b3873
yihN	None	MFS transporter family protein	Putative transport; Drug/analog sensitivity	Predicted transporter, inner membrane protein, function unknown	Probable false positive lipoprotein prediction, 10CM TMs, Cys not conserved. Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS).	b3874
yihO	squO	putative sulphoquinovose importer	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative sulphoquinovose importer	yihO(squO) is one of two transporter genes in the yih(squ) divergent sulphoquinovose (SQ) catabolism operon; YihO(SquO) but not YihP(SquP) is predicted to be an SQ importer because a yihO(squO) mutant fails to grow on SQ as a sole carbon source but a yihP(squP) mutant can still grow on SQ (Denger, 2014). Yih0(SquO) is a member of the Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS).	b3876
yihP	squP	putative 2,3-dihydroxypropane-1-sulphonate exporter, membrane protein	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative 2,3-dihydroxypropane-1-sulphonate exporter; membrane protein	yihP(squP) is one of two predicted transporter genes in the yih(squ) divergent sulphoquinovose (SQ) catabolism operon; YihO(SquO) but not YihP(SquP) is predicted to be an SQ importer because a yihO(squO) mutant fails to grow on SQ as a sole carbon source but a yihP(squP) mutant can still grow on SQ, so YihP(SquP) was proposed to excrete the 2,3-dihydroxypropane-1-sulphonate endproduct of SQ catabolism (Denger, 2014). Alternatively, since the putative sulpholipid alpha-glucosidase YihQ(SquQ) is predicted to be a cytoplasmic enzyme, YihP(SquP) could be a sulpholipid importer. YihP(SquP) belongs to the Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS).	b3877
yihQ	squQ	putative sulpholipid alpha-glucosidase; alpha-glucosyl fluoride glucosidase	Enzyme; Not classified	Putative sulpholipid alpha-glucosidase; alpha-glucosyl fluoride glucosidase	YihQ(SquQ) is proposed to be a sulpholipid alpha-glucosidase enabling the utilization of the sulphoquinovose (SQ) headgroup found in ubiquitous plant sulpholipids (Denger, 2014). YihQ(SquQ) has hydrolysis activity against alpha-glucosyl fluoride. YihQ(SquQ) is a member of glycoside hydrolase family 31.	b3878
yihR	squR	putative sulphoquinovose mutarotase	Enzyme; Not classified	Putative sulphoquinovose mutarotase	YihR(SquR) has been proposed to be an epimerase allowing the utilization of sulphoquinovose (SQ) derivatives (Denger, 2014). YihR(SquR) is the prototypical member of the YihR family (NCBI CDD cd09022) of the mutarotase superfamily (NCBI CDD cd01081; Pfam PF01263).	b3879
yihS	manC?, squS	sulphoquinovose isomerase	Enzyme; Not classified	Sulphoquinovose isomerase, sulphoglycolysis pathway	YihS(SquS) is sulphoquinovose (SQ) isomerase, converting 6-deoxy-6-sulphoglucose (SQ) to 6-deoxy-6-sulphofructose (SF) as the first catabolic step of SQ utilization by a sulphoglycolysis pathway; a yihS(squS) mutant does not grow on SQ as sole carbon source (Denger, 2014). YihS has weak D-mannose isomerase in vitro (Itoh, 2008). YihS may be the weak D-mannose isomerase associated with D-lyxose isomerase activity, involved in lyxose catabolism, previously mapped as manC, and purified, however the oligomeric forms and amino acid compositions differ (Stevens, 1976; Stevens, 1981). Overproduction of YihS from the ASKA clone allows for growth on D-lyxose as the sole carbon source (Notebaart, 2014). The YihS(SquS) protein was overproduced using a pET vector to force translation initiation; although the protein sequence does not verify the start site, the start site prediction is very reliable and the protein sequencing confirms a prediction that the initial methionine is not clipped off (Itoh, 2008).	b3880
yihT	squT	6-deoxy-6-sulphofructose-1-phosphate aldolase	Enzyme; Not classified	6-deoxy-6-sulphofructose-1-phosphate aldolase; sulphoglycolysis pathway	YihT(SquT) is 6-deoxy-6-sulphofructose-1-phosphate (SFP) aldolase, the third catabolic step of SQ utilization by a sulphoglycolysis pathway, cleaving SLP into 3-sulpholactaldehyde (SLA) and dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP); a yihT(squT) mutant does not grow on SQ as sole carbon source (Denger, 2014).	b3881
yihU	squU	3-sulpholactaldehyde (SLA) reductase, NADH-dependent; gamma-hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenase, NADH-dependent	Enzyme; Not classified	3-sulpholactaldehyde (SLA) reductase, NADH-dependent; sulphoglycolysis pathway; gamma-hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenase, NADH-dependent	YihU(SquU) is 3-sulpholactaldehyde (SLA) reductase, the fourth catabolic step of SQ utilization by a sulphoglycolysis pathway, reducing 3-sulpholactaldehyde to 2,3-dihydroxypropane-1-sulphonate (DHPS) in an NADH-dependent reaction; DHPS is excreted for other bacteria to complete the sulfur mineralization process; a yihU(squU) mutant does not grow on SQ as sole carbon source (Denger, 2014). Purified YihU(SquU) reduces succinic semialdehyde to gamma-hydroxybutyrate in an NADH-dependent reaction and a yihU(squU) mutant is more sensitive to exogenous succinic semialdehyde (Saito, 2009).	b3882
yihV	squV	6-deoxy-6-sulphofructose kinase	Enzyme; Not classified	6-deoxy-6-sulphofructose kinase, sulphoglycolysis pathway	YihV(SquV) is 6-deoxy-6-sulphofructose (SF) kinase, producing 6-deoxy-6-sulphofructose-1-phosphate (SFP) as the second catabolic step of SQ utilization by a sulphoglycolysis pathway; a yihV(squV) mutant does not grow on SQ as sole carbon source (Denger, 2014).	b3883
yihW	squW	putative transcriptional regulator for sulphoquinovose utilization	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Putative transcriptional regulator for sulphoquinovose operon	YihW(SquW) is predicted to be a transcriptional repressor for the divergent yih(squ) sulphoquinovose (SQ) utilization operon, but alternatively YihW(SquW) could be a transcriptional activator stimulating expression when SQ is present (Denger, 2014). YihW(SquW) belongs to the DeoR family of transcriptional regulators. 9/68 YihW peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed (Maillet, 2007).	b3884
yihX	None	alpha-D-glucose-1-phosphate phosphatase, anomer-specific	Enzyme; Not classified	Alpha-D-glucose-1-phosphate phosphatase, anomer-specific; physiological role unknown; HAD4	HAD superfamily. Phosphatase activities, including with additional substrates fructose-1-P and acetyl phosphate, were demonstrated in vitro (Kuznetsova, 2005; Kuznetsova, 2006).	b3885
yihY	rbn	BrkB family putative transporter, inner membrane protein	Null	BrkB family putative transporter, inner membrane protein; function unknown	yihY is no longer thought to be the structural gene for RNase BN. The structural gene for RNase BN has been identified: the elaC gene has been renamed as rbn. yihY and yhjD are distant paralogs; YhjD is a putative lipid exporter. YihY(Rbn) has been shown to be an inner membrane protein that has six predicted TM regions with its C-terminus in the cytoplasm (Daley, 2005). YihY and YhjD belong to the B. pertussis virulence factor BrkB family (PF03631), formerly known as the UPF0761 family, although they have not been shown to be virulence factors in E. coli (Fernandez, 1994).	b3886
dtd	yihZ	D-tyr-tRNA(Tyr) deacylase	Null	D-tyrosine tRNA deacylase; also removes other, e.g. D-Trp and D-Asp, toxic D-amino acids from tRNA; dimer	Null	b3887
yiiD	None	GNAT family putative N-acetyltransferase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	GNAT family putative N-acetyltransferase	Null	b3888
yiiE	None	CopG family putative transcriptional regulator	Null	Predicted CopG family transcriptional regulator; function unknown	yiiE and yiiF are adjacent and homologous. The N-terminal domain of YiiE belongs to the RHH-1 family (PF01402) of CopB-like predicted transcriptional repressors which is part of the RHH superfamily (IPR010985) of ribbon-helix-helix proteins.	b3889
yiiF	None	putative thymol sensitivity protein, CopG family putative transcriptional regulator	Null	Putative thymol sensitivity protein, CopG family; predicted transcriptional regulator	A transposon insertion 16 bp before yiiF confers thymol resistance, probably by interfering with yiiF expression (Shapira, 2007). yiiE and yiiF are adjacent and homologous. The N-terminal domain of YiiF belongs to the RHH-1 family (PF01402) of CopB-like predicted transcriptional repressors which is part of the RHH superfamily (IPR010985) of ribbon-helix-helix proteins.	b3890
fdoI	None	formate dehydrogenase-O, cytochrome b556 subunit	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Formate dehydrogenase-O cytochrome b556 subunit, aerobic	Also known as FDH-Z.	b3892
fdoH	None	formate dehydrogenase-O, Fe-S subunit	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Formate dehydrogenase-O Fe-S subunit, aerobic	Also known as FDH-Z. HT_Cmplx13_Mem: FdoG+FdoH.	b3893
fdoG	None	formate dehydrogenase-O, large subunit	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Formate dehydrogenase-O, selenopeptide, aerobic	Also known as FDH-Z. Verified Tat substrate: FdoG has a predicted Tat-only (Class I) 33 aa signal peptide (Tullman-Ercek, 2007). Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004). HT_Cmplx13_Mem: FdoG+FdoH. The UGA stop codon 196 is translated as selenocysteine in vivo and indicated as a "U" in the protein sequence.	b3894
fdhD	None	formate dehydrogenase formation protein	Phenotype; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Redox enzyme maturation protein (REMP) for FdnG/FdoG; required as a sulfurtransferase for formate dehydrogenase activity; probable cytoplasmic protein	FdhD is a sulfurtransferase transfering sulfur from IscS to FdhF (Thomé).	b3895
yiiG	None	DUF3829 family lipoprotein	Null	DUF3829 family lipoprotein, function unknown	The first 21 aa of yiiG are a type II signal peptide.	b3896
frvR	yiiH	putative frv operon regulator; contains a PTS EIIA domain	Putative regulator; Not classified	Putative frv operon regulator; contains a PTS EIIA domain	Null	b3897
frvX	yiiI	putative peptidase	Orf; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	Peptidase homolog, function unknown	ypdE, frvX and sgcX are paralogs. M42 family.	b3898
frvB	yiiJ	putative PTS enzyme, IIB component/IIC component	Enzyme; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	Predicted fructose-like PTS system enzyme IIBC	Null	b3899
frvA	yiiK	putative enzyme IIA component of PTS	Enzyme; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	Predicted fructose-like PTS system enzyme IIA	Null	b3900
rhaM	yiiL	L-rhamnose mutarotase	Null	L-rhamnose mutarotase	Null	b3901
rhaD	None	rhamnulose-1-phosphate aldolase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Rhamnulose-1-phosphate aldolase; homotetrameric	Null	b3902
rhaA	None	L-rhamnose isomerase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	L-rhamnose isomerase	RhaA also has L- lyxose isomerase activity and is needed for growth on L-lyxose (Badia, 1991).	b3903
rhaB	None	rhamnulokinase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Rhamnulokinase	Null	b3904
kdgT	None	2-keto-3-deoxy-D-gluconate transporter	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	2-keto-3-deoxygluconate permease	KDG is derived from pectin, a common plant heteropolysaccharide, although E. coli K-12 does not secrete pectinases or uptake pectin oligosaccharides and has only the core KDG regulon as compared to plant pathogens like Erwinia chrysanthemi, whose extracellular pectate lyases and intacellular oligogalacturonate lyase breaks pectin down mainly into 5-keto-4-deoxyuronate (DKI) monomers and to a lesser extent polygalacturonase-generated galacturonate; in E. coli K-12 galacturonate uptake and degradation is mediated by the ExuT permease and the UxaABC catabolic enzymes producing KDG, respectively, and DKI is imported by the KdgR-regulated KDG importer KdgT and catabolized to KDG by the KdgR-regulated KduID enyzymes, also producing KDG; KDG is converted to pyruvate and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate by KdsK and Eda(KdsA) (Rodionov, 2004; Hugouvieux-Cotte-Pattat, 1996).	b3909
yiiM	None	6-N-hydroxylaminopurine resistance protein	Null	6-N-hydroxylaminopurine resistance, function unknown	Molybdenum cofactor (MoCo), YcbX and YiiM are involved in the detoxification of 6-N-hydroxylaminopurine (HAP), which proceeds by a reduction to adenine (Kozmin, 2008).	b3910
gph	yhfE	phosphoglycolate phosphatase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Phosphoglycolate phosphatase; in dam operon; involved in degradation of 2-phosphoglycolate formed during the DNA repair of 3'-phosphoglycolate ends; HAD10	HAD superfamily. gph is a non-essential gene. Gph has weak phosphoramidase activity in vitro (Kuznetsova, 2006).	b3385
cpxP	yiiO	inhibitor of the cpx response; periplasmic adaptor protein	Null	Inhibitor of the cpx response; periplasmic adaptor protein, targets some proteins to DegP; dimeric	CpxP is involved in feedback inhibition of Cpx signal transduction. cpxP is induced in alkaline pH; CpxAR-regulated. CpxP and chaperone Spy are paralogs. CpxP suppresses toxic envelope protein effects. The first 21 aa of CpxP are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b4484
fieF	yiiP	ferrous iron and zinc transporter	Putative transport; Not classified	Ferrous-iron and zinc efflux pump; cation diffusion facilitator family; dimeric	FieF relieves iron stress.	b3915
yiiQ	None	DUF1454 family putative periplasmic protein	Null	DUF1454 family protein, function unknown	Overexpression of YiiQ causes abnormal biofilm architecture and increased crystal violet staining (Tenorio, 2003). The first 23 aa of YiiQ are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b3920
yiiR	None	DUF805 family putative inner membrane protein	Null	DUF805 family predicted inner membrane protein, function unknown	Null	b3921
yiiS	None	UPF0381 family protein	Null	UPF0381 family protein, function unknown	EvgAS regulon. YfcZ and YiiS are paralogs. The Shigella fleneri YiiS structure differs from K-12 YiiS by only one amino acid (Singarapu, 2010).	b3922
uspD	yiiT	stress-induced protein	Putative regulator; Not classified	Stress-induced protein; UV-resistance	Null	b3923
zapB	yiiU	FtsZ stabilizer, septal ring assembly factor, cell division stimulator	Null	FtsZ stabilizer, coiled-coil protein; septal ring assembly factor, stimulates cell division	Anchoring of the Ter macrodomain at mid-cell is mediated by MatP binding to ZapB (Espéli, 2012). ZapB forms filaments and binds FtsZ, presumably helping to form the initial Z-ring at the septum; septal localization of ZapB requires either FtsZ or ZipA; zapB mutants are elongated and have delayed cell division. ZapA binds to and recruits ZapB to the inner face of the Z-ring (Galli, 2010). Although the ATG at codon 3 is the conserved start codon, the spacing to the RBS is better for this proposed start.	b3928
rraA	menG, yiiV	ribonuclease E (RNase E) inhibitor protein	Null	Protein inhibitor of RNase E, modulates global mRNA abundance; trimeric	RraA is structurally similar to pyruvate aldolase but does not have C-C lyase activity; however if the active site consensus residues (G-X20-R-D-X2-E/D) are restored, RraA gains oxaloacetate decarboxylase activity (Mazurkewich, 2014). rraA (menG) was previously, erroneously, reported to encode demethylmenaquinone methyltransferase, in Genbank U56082; UbiE performs this final step, converting demethylmenaquinone to menaquinone. A CTG start codon five codons upstream of the current start has been proposed as an alternate start site, but lack of conservation suggests the current start is correct (Maillet, 2007).	b3929
menA	yiiW	1,4-dihydroxy-2-naphthoate octaprenyltransferase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Menaquinone, ubiquinone	1, 4-Dihydroxy-2-naphthoic acid (DHNA)-octaprenyltransferase; dimethylmenaquinone synthase; menaquinone biosynthesis	Null	b3930
hslU	clpY, htpI	molecular chaperone and ATPase component of HslUV protease	Factor; Adaptations, atypical conditions	Heat-inducible ATP-dependent protease HslVU, ATPase subunit; involved in the degradation of misfolded proteins; heat shock protein D48.5	An hslU deletion suppresses dnaA46(Ts). Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004).	b3931
yiiX	None	putative lipid binding hydrolase, DUF830 family protein	Null	Predicted lipid binding hydrolase, DUF830 family protein; function unknown	YebB and YiiX are paralogs. The first 18 aa of YiiX are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. YebB, YiiX and YaeF belong to the permuted papain-like NlpC/P60 enzyme (PPNE) superfamily; re-analysis of the unpublished E. coli YiiX structure PDB 2IF6 finds a probable fatty acid, modeled as stearic acid, in the active site, suggesting that YiiX is an amidase cleaving the amide bond between a fatty acid and a peptide (or protein) (Anantharaman, 2003; Xu, 2011). PDB 2IF6 is derived from E. coli O157:H7 and differs from the K-12 version at four residues.	b3937
tehA	None	potassium-tellurite ethidium and proflavin transporter	Transport; Drug/analog sensitivity	K+-tellurite, ethidium and proflavin efflux transporter	NsrR nitrite-sensitive regulon. TehA is a member of the telurite-resistance/dicarboxylate transporter (TDT) family. The resistance phenotypes of TehAB are observed when tehAB are cloned in multi-copy and overexpressed.	b1429
tehB	None	tellurite, selenium methyltransferase, SAM-dependent; tellurite, selenium resistance protein	Enzyme; Drug/analog sensitivity	Tellurite, selenium methyltransferase; tellurite, selenium resistance protein; dimeric	The resistance phenotypes of TehAB are observed when tehAB are cloned in multi-copy and overexpressed. The SAM cofacter of TehB is required for the resistance phenotypes (Liu, 2000). TehB has SAM-dependent tellurite methyltransferase and selenium methyltransferase activities in vitro (Choudhury, 2011).	b1430
opgG	mdoA, mdoG	OPG biosynthetic periplasmic beta-1,6 branching glycosyltransferase	Enzyme; Osmoregulated periplasmic glucan (OPG) biosynthesis	OPG biosynthetic beta-1,6 branching glycosyltransferase; periplasmic	The opg genes were originally called mdo because the osmoregulated periplasmic glucans (OPGs) were originally called membrane-derived oligosaccharides. The first 22 aa of OpgG are a type II signal peptide.	b1048
opgH	mdoA, mdoH	OPG biosynthetic ACP-dependent transmembrane UDP-glucose beta-1,2 glycosyltransferase; nutrient-dependent cell size regulator, FtsZ assembly antagonist	Enzyme; Osmoregulated periplasmic glucan (OPG) biosynthesis biosynthesis	OPG biosynthetic UDP-glucose beta-1,2 glycosyltransferase; transmembrane, ACP-dependent; nutrient-dependent cell size regulator; FtsZ assembly antagonist	The opg genes were originally called mdo because the osmoregulated periplasmic glucans (OPGs) were originally called membrane-derived oligosaccharides. HT_Cmplx46_Mem: MdoH+PlsB.	b1049
trxC	yfiG	thioredoxin 2	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Thioredoxin 2, zinc-binding; Trx2	OxyR regulon. Zinc is not required for reductase activity and may be part of a redox switch.	b2582
trmL	yibK	tRNA Leu mC34,mU34 2'-O-methyltransferase, SAM-dependent	Enzyme; tRNA modification	tRNA (Leu) mC34,mU34 2'-O-ribose methyltransferase, SAM-dependent	It has been suggested that trmL(yibK) and gltE, a streptomycin-dependent mutation affecting the in vitro activity of the GltX glutamate-tRNA ligase, are allelic because trmL(yibK) is the only ORF between the lld(lct) genes and cysE, citing the 1990 genetic map, but this map localization of the unsequenced gltE gene is only approximate, based on Hfr matings and a 5% transduction linkage to xylE; although trmL is consistent with this mapping data, so are many other uncharacterized ORFs; this suggestion has propagated to various databases; although streptomycin-dependent mutations are predicted to be in essential genes, trmL is not an essential gene and it is unclear how the TrmL leucine tRNA methyltransferase could affect in vitro GltX activity, therefore it seems unlikely that trmL(yibK) and gltE are allelic (Murgola, 1970a; Murgola, 1970b; Sofia, 1994). Although it is not certain that a TS revertant of the streptomycin-dependent phenotype of a gltE mutant is also in the gltE gene, transductional mapping of a gltE revertant TS phenotype is consistent with, and more precise, than the 5% xylE linkage; however the observed 63% linkage of pyrE and gltE is at odds with a 25% linkage predicted for the 34 kb pyrE-trmL interval (Lapointe, 1975; K.E.R., 2013). The cysX gene downstream of cysE is the reverse complement of trmL and is probably not a real gene (Tei, 1990). otherPDB (H. influenzae): 1J85, 1MXI.	b3606
dctR	yhiF	Putative LuxR family repressor for dicarboxylate transport	Null	Putative LuxR family repressor for C4-dicarboxylate transport	A dctR mutation reverses the succinate growth defect of an atp operon deletion resulting in a Suc+ growth phenotype; DctA overproduction also confers Suc+ to the atp deletion strain; cloned dctR complements the dctR mutant Suc+ phenotype restoring the Suc- phenotype conferred by the atp deletion; it was proposed that DctR(YhiF) is a repressor for the dctA gene and that yhiF be renamed as DctR (Boogerd, 1998). E. coli K-12 has other known and putative dicarboxylate transporters such as DcuAB, CitT and YbhI that were not tested for suppression of the Suc- phenotype, and DctR was not shown to be a dctA repressor, so DctR could be repressing a dicarboxylate transporter gene other than dctA. dctR and slp are in the AFI 12 gene acid fitness island and their roles in acids resistance are to counter the effects of organic acids in spent medium; a slp-dctR(yhiF) double mutant, but not either single mutant, loses protection against metabolites that are toxic at pH 2.5 including formate, succinate, and lactate, but not acetate; the double mutant phenotype can be complemented by a yhiF clone but complementation by a slp clone was not tested; this implies that Slp and DctR provide redundant protection; the protective role for DctR during the acid resistance response may be repression of one or more C4-dicarboxylate importers; a dctA mutant did not alter the slp-dctR phenotype, indicating that other C4-dicarboxylate importers in addition to or instead of DctA may be repressed by DctR (Mates, 2007). Overexpression of DctR causes filamentous biofilm formation (Tenorio, 2003). DctR is possibly involved in the regulation of type III secretion systems in enterohemorrhagic E. coli O157:H7 (Tatsuno, 2003). dctR is part of the EvgAS regulon (Masuda, 2002). Greater than 92% of the upstream slp mRNA is monocistronic and it is not known if all dctR expression is based on readthrough of the slp terminator or if dctR also has its own promoter (Alexander, 1994; Tucker, 2003).	b3507
slp	None	outer membrane lipoprotein	Membrane; Outer membrane constituents	Outer membrane lipoprotein, stationary phase inducible; also induced by carbon source starvation	dctR and slp are in the AFI 12 gene acid fitness island and their roles in acids resistance are to counter the effects of organic acids in spent medium; a slp-dctR(yhiF) double mutant, but not either single mutant, loses protection against metabolites that are toxic at pH 2.5 including formate, succinate, and lactate, but not acetate; the double mutant phenotype can be complemented by a yhiF clone but complementation by a slp clone was not tested; this implies that Slp and DctR provide redundant protection; the protective role for DctR during the acid resistance response may be repression of one or more C4-dicarboxylate importers; a dctA mutant did not alter the slp-dctR phenotype, indicating that other C4-dicarboxylate importers in addition to or instead of DctA may be repressed by DctR (Mates, 2007). It is unlikely that the outer membrane lipoprotein Slp and the LuxR family putative transcriptional regulator DctR perform redundant molecular functions; one possible explanation for the apparent redundant protection against acid stress is that Slp is required for C4-dicarboxylate export and that either active export (Slp+) or represssed import (DctR+) of acidifying organic acids is sufficient for protection against toxic metabolites during acid stress.   Cloned Slp has been shown to incorporate tritiated palmitate and mature Slp production is sensitive to globomycin, indicting Slp is a lipoprotein (Alexander, 1994). Greater than 92% of the slp mRNA is monocistronic and it is not known if all of the downstream dctR expression is based on readthrough of the slp terminator or if dctR also has its own promoter (Alexander, 1994; Tucker, 2003). slp is part of the EvgAS regulon (Masuda, 2002). The first 18 aa of Slp are a type II signal peptide. HT_Cmplx43_Mem: DcrB+MoaB+OsmE+Slp+YajG+YraP.	b3506
yeeA	None	putative transporter, FUSC family inner membrane protein	Null	Putative transporter, FUSC family inner membrane protein	Null	b2008
sbmC	dgi, gyrI, yeeB	DNA gyrase inhibitor	Null	DNA gyrase inhibitor; in high copy protects cells from replication inhibitor MccB17; SOS induced; blocks MccB17 export	sbmC has been demonstrated to to have a CRP-S promoter co-regulated by both Crp and Sxy (Cameron, 2006).	b2009
dacD	phsE(S.t.), phsF(S.t.), yeeC	D-alanyl-D-alanine carboxypeptidase; penicillin-binding protein 6b	Putative enzyme; Murein sacculus, peptidoglycan	D-alanine D-alanine carboxypeptidase PBP6b; penicillin-binding protein 6b	The first 21 aa of DacA predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b2010
yeeD	None	putative TusA family sulfurtransferase	Null	Predicted TusA family sulfurtransferase	tusA, yedF and yeeD are paralogs.	b2012
yeeE	None	UPF0394 family inner membrane protein	Putative transport; Not classified	Inner membrane protein, UPF0394 family, function unknown	DUF395 domain. YeeE is encoded in an operon with predicted sulfurtransferase YeeD.	b2013
plaP	yeeF	putrescine importer, low affinity	Transport; Not classified	Putrescine importer, low affinity; possible cell density sensor	PlaP is a low affinity putrescine importer and may sense cell density; a plaP mutant is defective for putrescine-induced fimA-dependent surface motility (Kurihara, 2011). A plaP(yeeF) mutant is defective for swarming motility (Inoue, 2007).	b2014
rpoE	sigE	RNA polymerase sigma E factor	Regulator; Global regulatory functions	RNA polymerase sigma E factor; role in extracytoplasmic, high temperature and oxidative stress responses; sigma 24 initiation factor	RpoE encodes Sigma E, a Group IV sigma factor that promotes open complex formation by flipping out a single nucleotide from the non-template DNA strand at the -10 element (Campagne, 2014). rpoE is transiently induced after a cold shock, dependent on the presence of PNPase. rpoE is induced by, and increases resistance to, Cd(II), Zn(II) and Cu(II). rpoE is an essential gene that can be disrupted only in the presence of unlinked suppressor mutations, e.g. ydcQ (De Las Penas, 1997, Button, 2006). RpoE is a type IV sigma factor. 7/56 RpoE peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed (Maillet, 2007).	b2573
recT	None	Rac prophage; recombination and repair protein	Enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification: Phage or Prophage Related	RecET recombinase, annealing protein, Rac prophage; recombination and repair	RecT still functions without RecE, less efficiently, thus it a short homology recombinase, useful for recombineering. recT is activated by the sbcA mutation.	b1349
ralR	lar, ral, ydaB	Rac prophage; restriction alleviation protein	Enzyme; Phage or Prophage Related	DNase toxin of RalRA type I toxin-antitoxin pair; Rac prophage; putative restriction alleviation gene	RalR is the DNase toxin of the RalRA type I toxin-antitoxin pair; RalR may be involved in DnaA-overproduction-induced dsDNA breaks and the previous RcbA suppression effects may be due to the inhibition of the RalR DNAse due to RalA sRNA overexpression, not YdaC protein overexpression (Guo, 2014).	b1348
ydaC	rcbA	DUF1187 family protein, Rac prophage; putative double-strand break reduction protein	Phage or Prophage Related	DUF1187 family protein, Rac prophage; putative double-strand break reduction protein	RcbA(YdaC) is a Rac-encoded gene that reduces the frequency of double-stranded chromsosome breaks when DnaA is over-produced; an rcbA mutant has increased DNA breaks and a reduced growth rate (Felczak, 2012). The RcbA phenotype might be due to expression of the RalA sRNA antitoxin encoded on the opposite strand as ydaC; the RalR protein is a DNase toxin (Guo, 2014). ydaC does appear to encode a conserved DUF1187 family protein of unknown function (Pfam PF06688); until it is determined whether or not RalA, and presumably RalR, are involved in the DnaA-induced dsDNA breaks, and whether or not the putative YdaC protein is involved, rbcA is changed back to ydaC and rbcA is added as a synonym to both ydaC and ralA.	b1347
yijE	None	EamA-like transporter family protein	Null	EamA-like transporter family protein, function unknown	YijE belongs to the EamA/RhaT transporter family, DMT superfamily.	b3943
yijF	None	DUF1287 family protein	Null	DUF1287 family protein, function unknown	DUF1287 (PF06940) has been assigned to the peptidase_CA (CL0125) clan at the Pfam database, citing an HHSearch hit to Amidase_6 (PF12671) and a transitive relatedness to NLPC_P60 (PF00877) which has an HHSearch hit to PF12671.	b3944
gldA	None	glycerol dehydrogenase, NAD+ dependent; 1,2-propanediol:NAD+ oxidoreductase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	Glycerol dehydrogenase, NAD+ dependent; 1,2-propanediol:NAD+ oxidoreductase	GldA is a reversible oxidoreductase with a broad substrate specificity, including dihydroxyacetone, hydroxyacetone, glycolaldehyde and methylglyoxal (Subedi, 2008).	b3945
fsaB	talC, yijG	fructose-6-phosphate aldolase 2	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Fructose-6-phosphate aldolase B	Null	b3946
frwA	ptsA, yijH	putative PTS enzyme: Hpr, enzyme I and II components	Enzyme; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	Predicted multiphosphoryl transfer protein: PTS HPr, EIIA and EI; MTP-Frw; multi-domain fructose-like PTS protein with enzyme I, type-2 EIIA, and HPr-like domains	Null	b3947
frwC	yijJ	putative enzyme IIC component of PTS	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	Predicted fructose-like PTS system enzyme IIC	Null	b3949
frwB	yijK	putative enzyme IIB component of PTS	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Predicted fructose-like PTS system enzyme IIB, component 1	Null	b3950
pflD	yijL	putative glycine radical domain-containing pyruvate formate-lyase	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Putative pyruvate formate-lyase; glycine radical domain	Null	b3951
pflC	yijM	putative [formate-C-acetyltransferase 2]-activating enzyme; pyruvate formate-lyase 1-activating enzyme	Putative enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Predicted [formate-C-acetyltransferase 2]-activating enzyme; pyruvate formate-lyase 1-activating enzyme	Radical SAM superfamily.	b3952
frwD	yijN	putative enzyme IIB component of PTS	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Predicted fructose-like PTS system enzyme IIB, component 2	Null	b3953
yijO	None	AraC family putative transcriptional activator	Putative regulator; Not classified	AraC family putative transcriptional activator, function unknown	Null	b3954
eptC	cptA(S.t.), yijP	LPS heptose I phosphoethanolamine transferase	Null	LPS heptose I phosphoethanolamine transferase	EptC(YijP) is responsible for the phosphoethanolamine (P-EtN) addition to heptose I of LPS; eptC is regulated by PhoBR; eptC mutants are sensitive to destabilization of the outer membrane by SDS, zinc and other compounds (Klein, 2013). EptC(YijP) was also characterized in Salmonella and named as CptA (Tamayo, 2005). The CptA name is used for the YgfX toxin in E. coli. EptAB family. EptC(YijP) is required for invasion of K1 into brain microvascular endothelial cells (Wang, 1999). 	b3955
nfi	yjaF	endonuclease V; deoxyinosine 3' endonuclease	Enzyme; Degradation of DNA	Endonuclease V, specific for single-stranded DNA or duplex DNA with damaged U; deoxyinosine 3' endonuclease; inosine 3' endoribonuclease	Nfi can cleave inosine containing ssRNA and dsRNA (Sebastian, 2013).	b3998
yjaG	None	DUF416 domain protein	Null	DUF416 family protein, function unknown	otherPDB(S.baltica): 2Q9R.	b3999
yjaH	None	DUF1481 family putative lipoprotein	Null	DUF1481 family probable lipoprotein, function unknown	The first 30 aa of YjaH are predicted to be a type II signal peptide. The putative lipidation and cleavage site Cys of YjaH is conserved.	b4001
zraP	yjaI, zra	Zn-dependent periplasmic chaperone	Null	Zn-dependent periplasmic chaperone	ZraP of Salmonella has been shown to be an ATP-independent Zn-dependent periplasmic chaperone (). zraP expression is regulated by the ZraSR two-component system and RpoN. OtherPDB(S.typhinmurium): 3LAY.	b4002
yjbB	None	putative Na+/Pi-cotransporter	Phenotype; Not classified	Probable Na+/Pi-cotransporter	YjbB overexpression increases Pi export and reduces intracellular polyphosphate levels (Motomura, 2011). YjbB belongs to the Pfam PF02690 Na+/Pi-cotransporter family.	b4020
pepE	None	peptidase E, alpha-aspartyl dipeptidase	Enzyme; Degradation of proteins, peptides, glyco	Peptidase E, alpha-aspartyl dipeptidase	Null	b4021
rluF	yjbC	23S rRNA pseudouridine(2604) synthase	Enzyme; rRNA modification	23S rRNA pseudouridine(2604) synthase	Null	b4022
yjbD	None	DUF3811 family protein	Null	DUF3811 family protein, function unknown	yjbD was previously mislabeled as pagB.	b4023
yjbE	None	extracellular polysaccharide production threonine-rich protein	Null	Threonine-rich protein; required to make novel extracellular polysaccharide	Overexpression of the yjbEFGH operon alters colony morphology and leads to production of a novel extracellular polysaccharide (Ferrieres, 2007). The yjbEFGH operon is in the RcsC regulon but does not seem to affect biofilm formation in the K-12 strain BW25113 background, but another group did report a defect in biofilm formation for a yjbE mutant in the K-12 strain W3110 background (Ferrières, 2003; Ferrières, 2007; Herzberg, 2006). yjbE and gfcA(ymcD) are paralogs. YjbE is predicted to have a 21 aa signal peptide.	b4026
yjbF	None	extracellular polysaccharide production lipoprotein	Null	Lipoprotein required to make novel extracellular polysaccharide	Overexpression of the yjbEFGH operon alters colony morphology and leads to production of a novel extracellular polysaccharide (Ferrieres, 2007). The yjbEFGH operon is in the RcsC regulon but does not seem to affect biofilm formation in the K-12 strain BW25113 background, but another group did report a defect in biofilm formation for a yjbE mutant in the K-12 strain W3110 background (Ferrières, 2003; Ferrières, 2007; Herzberg, 2006). yjbF and gfcB(ymcC) are paralogs. The first 15 aa of YjbF are a type II signal peptide.	b4027
yjbG	None	extracellular polysaccharide export OMA protein	Null	Extracellular polysaccharide export OMA protein	Overexpression of the yjbEFGH operon alters colony morphology and leads to production of a novel extracellular polysaccharide (Ferrieres, 2007). The yjbEFGH operon is in the RcsC regulon but does not seem to affect biofilm formation in the K-12 strain BW25113 background, but another group did report a defect in biofilm formation for a yjbE mutant in the K-12 strain W3110 background (Ferrières, 2003; Ferrières, 2007; Herzberg, 2006). yjbG and gfcC(ymcB) are paralogs. The first 20 aa of YjbG are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b4028
yjbH	None	DUF940 family extracellular polysaccharide protein	Null	DUF940 family protein; required to make novel extracellular polysaccharide	Overexpression of the yjbEFGH operon alters colony morphology and leads to production of a novel extracellular polysaccharide (Ferrieres, 2007). The yjbEFGH operon is in the RcsC regulon but does not seem to affect biofilm formation in the K-12 strain BW25113 background, but another group did report a defect in biofilm formation for a yjbE mutant in the K-12 strain W3110 background (Ferrières, 2003; Ferrières, 2007; Herzberg, 2006). yjbH and gfcD(ymcA) are paralogs. YjbH has both type II (17 aa) and (somewhat better) type I (20 aa) signal peptide predictions by LipoP. YjbH may not be a lipoprotein because the lipobox Cys is poorly conserved.	b4029
yjbI'	None	pseudogene, SopA-related, pentapeptide repeats-containing	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction, SopA-related, pentapeptide repeats	YjbI' has the N-terminal pentapeptide repeats-related domain (NCBI COG1357) and the SopA central domain (Pfam PF13981), but lacks the C-terminal ubiquitin ligase domain, of SopA and NleL proteins (PDB 2QYU, 2QZA, 3NAW, 3NB2) (Diao, 2008; Lin, 2011). An apparent 1 bp deletion at codon 62 and an apparent 1 bp insertion at codon 86 causing frameshifts in yjbI' were reversed for a hypothetical reconstruction of YjbI'.	b4038
yjbJ	None	stress-induced protein, UPF0337 family	Null	Stress-induced protein, UPF0337 family, function unknown	yjbJ is in the RpoS regulon (Patten, 2006; Weber, 2005). YjbJ is related to the CsbD sigma-B-regulated stress protein of B. subtilis. YjbJ has been detected in 2D gels of expressed proteins (Link, 1997; Wasinger, 1998). YjbJ is induced by cadmium, especially at pH 5 (Worden, 2009). YjbJ is induced by NaCl salt stress (Weber, 2006).	b4045
zur	yjbK	transcriptional repressor, Zn(II)-binding	Putative regulator; Not classified	Repressor for znuABC, the zinc high-affinity transport genes; dimer; binds two Zn(II) ions per monomer	Although the N-terminal sequence was derived from a vector with an artificial RBS, Patzer and Hantke (2000) demonstrate that the second ATG is the correct start. The sequenced Zur has the same MW as Zur from a clone expressing Zur from its own RBS.	b4046
yjbL	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Function unknown	Null	b4047
yjbM	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Function unknown	Null	b4048
dusA	yjbN	tRNA-dihydrouridine synthase A	Enzyme; tRNA modification	tRNA-dihydrouridine synthase A	An alternate start site 15 codons upsteam is now annotated because an upstream DusA peptide was detected using shotgun proteomics (Krug, 2013).	b4049
pspG	yjbO	phage shock protein G	Null	Effector of phage shock response; over expression reduces motility, function unknown	pspG is co-regulated with the psp operon and is a member of the pspF-dependent regulon. pspG is not physically linked to the psp operon, but is co-conserved.	b4050
aphA	hobH, napA, yjbP	acid phosphatase/phosphotransferase, class B, non-specific	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Nucleotide hydrolysis	Acid phosphatase, periplasmic, class B, nucleotidase; active on 3'- and 5'-mononucleotides and monodeoxynucleotides; glucose-repressed; monomeric	A misidentification of the Salmonella pncC gene occurred when a selection for NMN catabolism mutants identified a gene (aphA) with a metabolic activity required for NMN uptake, not the catabolic enzyme NMN deamidase; the periplasmic AphA is required for the de-phosphorylation of MNM to form nicotinamide riboside, the PnuC transporter substrate (Cheng, 1995; Grose, 2005). Mutants arrest cell division after hyperosmoshock and overexpress SeqA; also binds hemi-methylated oriC DNA in vitro. As a periplasmic DNA-binding protein, AphA may play a role during DNA transformation.	b4055
yjbQ	None	thiamine phosphate synthase	Null	Multicopy suppressor of thiE and pdxB; weak thiamine phosphate synthase activity	YjbQ has weak thiamine phosphate synthase activity in vitro, but this may not be its physiologicl function (Morett, 2008). yjbQ is a multi-copy suppressor of a pdxB deletion (Kim, 2010).	b4056
yjbR	None	DUF419 family protein	Null	DUF419 family protein, function unknown	YjbR double wings NMR structure resembles the phage T4 MotA DNA-binding C-terminal domain (Singarapu, 2007).	b4057
yjcB	None	putative inner membrane protein	Null	Putative inner membrane protein, function unknown	YjcB is a conserved protein with two predicted transmembrane regions.	b4060
yjcC	None	putative membrane-anchored cyclic-di-GMP phosphodiesterase	Null	Predicted membrane-anchored cyclic-di-GMP phosphodiesterase	YjcC has an N-terminal predicted periplasmic CSS domain (PF12792) flanked by two TM segments and has a C-terminal cytoplasmic EAL PDE domain.	b4061
ghxP	yjcD	guanine/hypoxanthine permease, high affinity; guanine/hypoxanthine:H+ symporter	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Nucleosides, purines, pyrimidines	Guanine/hypoxanthine permease, high affinity	ghxP(yjcD) is in the PurR regulon (Marbach, 2012).	b4064
yjcE	None	putative cation/proton antiporter	Null	Function unknown; similar to eukaryotic Na+/H+ exchangers, but not involved in Na+ extrusion	Null	b4065
yjcF	None	pentapeptide repeats protein	Null	Pentapeptide repeats protein, function unknown	YjcF has 42 tandem pentapeptide repeats located from residues 162-371 (NCBI COG1357; Pfam PF00805) (Bateman, 1998). Like the pentapeptide repeats-related protein gene yhaC, yjcF is in one of the regions of extreme structure (RES17), perhaps correlated to the DNA mimic role proposed for pentapeptide repeats proteins. OtherPDB: 2BM4 (M. tuberculosis), 2W7Z (E. faecalis), 3DU1 (Anabaena sp.).	b4066
actP	yjcG	acetate transporter	Null	Acetate permease	Null	b4067
yjcH	None	DUF485 family inner membrane protein	Null	Inner membrane protein, DUF485 family, function unknown	Null	b4068
nrfB	yjcI	nitrite reductase, formate-dependent, penta-heme cytochrome c	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Cytochrome c nitrite reductase, pentaheme cytochrome, periplasmic; formate-dependent; required for NO synthesis	SignalP strongly predicts a signal of 32 aa (34 aa if a GTG start at -2 is used), as previously noted (Clarke, 2004), but N-terminal sequencing found a cleavage after 25 residues (Clarke, 2007).	b4071
nrfC	yjcJ	formate-dependent nitrite reductase, 4Fe4S subunit	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Formate-dependent nitrite reduction; nonheme FE-S protein, ferredoxin-like	Verified Tat substrate: NrfC has a Tat-only (Class I) predicted 27 aa signal peptide (Tullman-Ercek, 2007). 	b4072
nrfD	yjcK	formate-dependent nitrite reductase, membrane subunit	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Formate-dependent nitrite reduction; transmembrane protein similar to QOR	Null	b4073
nrfE	yjcL	heme lyase (NrfEFG) for insertion of heme into c552, subunit NrfE	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Required for NrfA maturation; NrfEFG heme lyase complex; formate-dependent nitrite reduction	Null	b4074
nrfF	yjcM	heme lyase (NrfEFG) for insertion of heme into c552, subunit NrfF	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Required for NrfA maturation; NrfEFG heme lyase complex; formate-dependent nitrite reduction	The first 18 aa of NrfF are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. 	b4075
nrfG	aidC, yjcN	heme lyase (NrfEFG) for insertion of heme into c552, subunit NrfG	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Required for NrfA maturation; binds NrfA; NrfEFG heme lyase complex; formate-dependent nitrite reduction	False positive lipoprotein prediction, Cys not conserved. TPR domain. The crystal structure 2E2E is derived from strain O157:H7, and differs at two positions from K-12, T54N and L197S.	b4076
yjcO	None	Sel1 family TPR-like repeat protein	Null	Sel1 family TPR-like repeat protein; function unknown	YjcO is comprised of four tandem Sel1 TPR-like repeat domains, but the second copy has degenerate or variant sequence making it difficult to detect. The first 17 aa of YjcO are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b4078
mdtP	sdsP, yjcP	outer membrane factor of efflux pump	Orf; Not classified	Outer membrane factor (OMF) of MdtNOP efflux pump; probable lipoprotein, Cys conserved; tolC homolog; mutants are sensitive to acriflavin and puromycin	TolC, MdtQ, MdtP and CusC are paralogs. The first 23 aa of MdtP are a predicted type II signal peptide.	b4080
mdtO	sdsQ, yjcQ	membrane translocase (MDR) of MdtNOP efflux pump, PET family	Orf; Not classified	PET family membrane translocase (MDR) of MdtNOP efflux pump; mdtP mutants are sensitive to acriflavin and puromycin	Null	b4081
mdtN	sdsR, yjcR	membrane fusion protein of efflux pump	Putative membrane; Not classified	Membrane fusion protein (MFP) of MdtNOP efflux pump, signal anchor; mdtP mutants are sensitive to acriflavin and puromycin	Null	b4082
yjcS	None	putative alkylsulfatase; SDS catabolic enzyme	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Putative alkylsulfatase; SDS hydrolase; periplasmic	YjcS is a probable periplasmic alkylsulfatase, is able to hydrolyze SDS, and has a 29 amino acid cleavable signal peptide (Liang, 2014). Flagellar regulon. The yjcS gene can be transcribed in vitro with sigma28 (FliA) holoenzyme (Yu, 2006). YjcS belongs to the metallo-beta-lactamase superfamily, including alkyl sulfatase, thioesterase, glyoxalase II and related hydrolases.	b4083
alsK	yjcT	D-allose kinase	Putative regulator; Not classified	D-allose kinase	Upregulated by GSNO in defined medium (aerobic).	b4084
alsE	yjcU	allulose-6-phosphate 3-epimerase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	D-allulose-6-phosphate 3-epimerase	Null	b4085
alsC	yjcV	D-allose ABC transporter permease	Putative transport; Not classified	D-allose ABC transporter permease	Null	b4086
alsA	yjcW	D-allose ABC transporter ATPase	Putative transport; Not classified	D-allose ABC transporter ATPase	Null	b4087
rpe	dod, yhfD	D-ribulose-5-phosphate 3-epimerase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Non-oxidative branch, pentose pathway	D-ribulose-5-phosphate 3-epimerase	Null	b3386
lldP	lct, lctP	L-lactate permease	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	L-lactate permease; also involved in glycolate uptake	IT (Ion Transporter) superfamily (Prakash, 2003). ST(3) structural class based on hydropathy profile (Lolkema, 2003).	b3603
lldR	lct, lctR	dual role activator/repressor for lldPRD operon	Regulator; Energy metabolism, carbon: Aerobic respiration	Dual role activator/repressor for lldPRD operon	LldR is a HTH GntR-type DNA-binding transcriptional regulator.	b3604
lldD	lct, lctD	L-lactate dehydrogenase, FMN-linked	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Aerobic respiration	L-lactate dehydrogenase, FMN dependent	LldD is an inner membrane-associated protein (Kung, 1972; Futai, 1977; Lopez-Campistrous, 2005). LldD is probably a cytoplasmic protein that is tail-anchored to the inner membrane by a TMPred-predicted C-terminal transmembrane helix (score=1016; residues 331-351) which indicates that the C-terminal 45 residues are probably in the periplasm (K.E.R.). Arc regulon.	b3605
yibL	None	ribosome-associated DUF2810 family protein	Null	Ribosome-associated DUF2810 family protein, function unknown	YibL is a ribosome-associated protein (Jiang, 2007).	b3602
mtlR	None	mannitol operon repressor	Regulator; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Mannitol operon repressor	Purified MtlR does not bind to mtlA operator DNA in vitro (Tan, 2009). OtherPDB (V. parahaemolyticus): 3BRJ. MtlR and YggD are paralogs, Pfam:PF05068.	b3601
adiY	None	adi system transcriptional activator	Putative regulator; Not classified	Transcriptional activator for adiA, AraC family 	Null	b4116
flgK	flaS	flagellar hook-filament junction protein 1	Structural component; Surface structures	Flagellar synthesis, hook-associated protein	Flagellar regulon.	b1082
arfA	yhdL	alternate ribosome-rescue factor A	Null	Alternative stalled-ribosome rescue factor A; binds 50S ribosomal subunits, synthetic lethal with ssrA; recruits RF-2	ArfA recruits release factor RF-2 to release tRNA from stalled ribosomes (Shimizu, 2012; Chadani, 2012). ArfA can rescue stalled ribosomes at the end of a non-stop mRNA without trans-translation (Chadani, 2010). arfB(yaeJ) is a multicopy suppressor of the synthetic lethality of ssrA and arfA (Chadani, 2011a). ArfA translation is regulated by SsrA: in the absence of SsrA a 55 aa truncated ArfA missing the last 18 aa is released from the ribosome and is functional in ribosome rescue (Chadani, 2011b; Garza-Sánchez, 2011). DUF331 family.	b4550
zntR	yhdM	zntA gene transcriptional activator	Putative regulator; Not classified	Zn-responsive activator of zntA transcription	Null	b3292
yhdN	None	DUF1992 family protein	Null	Heat shock protein, DUF1992 family, function unknown, 	YhdN has been shown to be a heat shock protein and to be in the RpoH regulon (Nonaka, 2006; Rasouly, 2009). YhdN is induced during an unfolded protein response initiated with canavanine treatment (Rasouly, 2009).	b3293
nupC	cru	nucleoside (except guanosine) transporter	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Nucleosides, purines, pyrimidines	Nucleoside transporter, except guanosine	CytR regulon. nupC, nupX, and yegT are paralogs. CNT family.	b2393
htrE	None	putative outer membrane usher protein	Putative membrane; Surface structures	Putative outer membrane fimbrial subunit export usher protein; required for growth at high temperature; induced by heat shock	FimD family. The first 29 aa of HtrE are a type I signal peptide: the HtrE start site has been confirmed by N-terminal protein sequencing and the first 29 aa are removed; Raina, S. (1994) personal communication cited in SwissProt P33129.	b0139
yadV	ecpD	putative periplasmic pilin chaperone	Putative factor; Surface structures	Predicted periplasmic pilus chaperone, function unknown	ecpD was changed to yadV since ecp is now used for the E. coli common pilus genes (Garnett, 2012). YadV(EcpD) has Ig-like domains: pfam PF00345 aligns to N-terminal residues 26-145, and pfam PF02753 aligns to C-terminal residues 157-244. The first 25 aa of YadV are a predicted type I signal peptide.	b0140
fimI	None	fimbrial protein involved in type 1 pilus biosynthesis	Structural component; Surface structures	FimA homolog required for fimbriae biosynthesis	FimI is one of 25 FimA homologs in E. coli K-12. The first 19 aa of FimI are predicted to be a cleavable type I signal peptide.	b4315
fliP	flaR	flagellar biosynthesis protein	Putative structure; Surface structures	Flagellin export apparatus, integral membrane protein	Flagellar regulon. The first 21 aa of FliP are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b1948
fliQ	flaQ	flagellar biosynthesis protein	Putative structure; Surface structures	Flagellin export apparatus, integral membrane protein	Flagellar regulon.	b1949
fliR	flaP	flagellar export pore protein	Putative enzyme; Surface structures	Flagellin export apparatus, integral membrane protein	Flagellar regulon.	b1950
rfbA	rmlA, som	glucose-1-phosphate thymidylyltransferase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Sugar-nucleotide biosynthesis, conversions	Glucose-1-phosphate thymidylyltransferase 1; TDP-glucose pyrophosphorylase; needed for dTDP-L-rhamnose synthesis	Null	b2039
rfbC	rfbD, rmlC	dTDP-4-deoxyrhamnose-3,5-epimerase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Sugar-nucleotide biosynthesis, conversions	dTDP-4-deoxyrhamnose-3,5-epimerase	Mutations in rfbC have a hyperlethality phenotype when cells are stressed; RfbC is a protein that reduces the lethal effects of stress (Han, 2010).	b2038
wzxB	rfbX, wzx	putative polisoprenol-linked O-antigen transporter	Putative transport; Surface polysaccharides & antigens	Predicted polisoprenol-linked O-antigen translocating flippase; lethality reduction protein	Mutations in wzxB have a hyperlethality phenotype when cells are stressed; WzxB is a protein that reduces the lethal effects of stress (Han, 2010).	b2037
glf	yefE	UDP-galactopyranose mutase, FAD/NAD(P)-binding	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	UDP-galactopyranose mutase	Null	b2036
wbbH	rfc, yefF	O-antigen polymerase	Enzyme; Macromolecule metabolism: Lipopolysaccharide	O-antigen polymerase	Null	b2035
wbbI	yefG	d-Galf:alpha-d-Glc beta-1,6-galactofuranosyltransferase	Enzyme; Lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis	d-Galf:alpha-d-Glc beta-1,6-galactofuranosyltransferase; involved in lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis	6/80 WbbI peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is not removed (Maillet, 2007).	b2034
wbbJ	yefH	putative lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis O-acetyl transferase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Predicted lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis O-acetyl transferase; involved in lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis	WbbJ contains hexapeptide repeats.	b2033
wbbK	yefI	lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis protein	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Involved in lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis	Null	b2032
wbbL'	yefJ	pseudogene, lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis protein	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction, rhamnosyl transferase; lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis; interrupted by IS5I	IS5I inserted at codon 148 and made a 4 bp target site duplication TTAA. An intact version is present in NCBI gi 460651 from E. coli K-12 strain WG1.	b4571
yehA	None	putative fimbrial-like adhesin protein	Putative structural component; Surface structures	Putative fimbrial protein; in yehDCBA fimbrial operon	First 20 aa are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. YehA has a C-terminal FimA-like domain.	b2108
yehB	None	putative outer membrane protein	Putative membrane; Not classified	Putative outer membrane fimbrial subunit export usher protein	FimD family. First 22 aa are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b2109
yehC	None	putative periplasmic pilin chaperone	Putative factor; Surface structures	Predicted periplasmic pilus chaperone	YehC has Ig-like domains: pfam PF00345 aligns to N-terminal residues 34-157, and pfam PF02753 aligns to C-terminal residues 161-239. First 33 aa are a predicted type I signal peptide.	b2110
yehD	None	putative fimbrial-like adhesin protein	Putative structural component; Surface structures	FimA homolog	YehD is one of 25 FimA homologs in E. coli K-12. The first 22 aa of YehD are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b2111
yehE	None	DUF2574 family protein	Null	DUF2574 family protein	The first 22 aa of YehE are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b2112
yehH'	dinO, molR, sosF, yehF, yehG	DUF4132 family pseudogene; defective yehI paralog	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction, DUF4132 family domain protein; WGR-like domain-containing protein, LexA-regulated	yehH' appears to have an in-frame stop codon at position 275 and an apparent frameshift mutation at codon 950 that are hypothetically reconstructed. The yehI' b2115 ORF (molR') has been reported to be involved in molybdate metabolism (Lee, 1990). YehH' has an N-terminal WGR-like domain, as does YfeS; WGR domains are associated with eukaryotic poly-ADP ribosylation proteins (PARPs) and may be involved with DNA-activation; YehH' paralog YehI lacks an N-terminal WGR-like domain. Preceding the C-terminal DUF41332 domain shared with YehH, YehI and YehH also share the automatically-generated Pfam-B conserved domain PB000112. A Tn insertion in the yehH'(molR') gene is unable to reduce selenate to selenite (Bébien, 2002). The yehI' fragment ORF b2115 mRNA is transcribed and regulated by LexR and this predicted YehI' fragment may have retained a function in molybdate metabolism as evidenced by the ability to get mutant phenotypes (Lee, 1990; Fernández de Henestrosa, 2000; Bébien, 2002). LexA regulon. YehI and YehH' are paralogs.	b4499
yehI	None	DUF4132 domain-containing protein	Putative regulator; Not classified	DUF4132 family protein, YehH paralog	YehH' paralog YehI lacks an N-terminal WGR-like domain; YehH' has an N-terminal WGR-like domain, as does YfeS; WGR domains are associated with eukaryotic poly-ADP ribosylation proteins (PARPs) and may be involved with DNA-activation. Preceding the C-terminal DUF41332 domain shared with YehH, YehI and YehH also share the automatically-generated Pfam-B conserved domain PB000112. yehH'I appear to constitute a defective operon; and since yehH' is an SOS-inbduced gene in the LexA regulon, yehI is also likely to be LexA-regulated.	b2118
yehK	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Uncharacterized protein	Putative gene yehK is restricted to E. coli and Shigella strains, including many truncated versions and the presence of in-frame stop codons. yehK was not originally annotated as a gene but was added later based on a GeneMark.hmm 2.4 prediction of an atypical protein coding region. An insertion in a version of yehK in EPEC E. coli blocks interference with host functions, but may be affecting the downstream gene yehL (Nadler, 2006).	b4541
yehL	None	putative hexameric AAA+ MoxR family ATPase	Null	Putative hexameric AAA+ MoxR family ATPase; possible molecular chaperone	YehP is a VWA domain protein predicted to be a direct stimulator of the AAA+ MoxR family predicted ATPase YehL, analogous to the ViaA stimulation of RavA (Snider, 2006a; Snider, 2006b).	b2119
yehM	yehN, yehO	uncharacterized protein	Null	Uncharacterized protein	yehM is in an operon with yehL and the VWA domain protein yehP, and is fused to yehP in some organisms suggesting that yehMLP function together (Snider, 2006).	b2120
yehP	None	VMA domain putative YehL ATPase stimulator	Null	VWA domain protein, predicted stimulator of YehL ATPase; required for swarming phenotype	YehP is a VWA domain protein predicted to be a direct stimulator of the AAA+ MoxR family predicted ATPase YehL, analogous to the ViaA stimulation of RavA (Snider, 2006a; Snider, 2006b). yehP mutants are defective in swarming motility (Inoue, 2007).	b2121
yehQ'	None	pseudogene	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction	Intact YehQ alleles can be found in E. coli CFT073 and S. flexneri and many other E. coli strains. The YehQ version in E. coli O157:H7 is longer at the C-terminus. The homolog in Leptospira interrogans (LA0696) is similar in size to the CFT073 version. The in-frame stop codon 615 has been reconstructed with an X. The extension of yehQ makes intergenic repeat TERM36 no longer intergenic.	b2122
yehR	None	lipoprotein, DUF1307 family	Enzyme; Transport of small molecules: Cations	DUF1307 family lipoprotein, function unknown	The first 22 aa of YehR are a verified type II signal peptide (Juncker, 2003).	b2123
yehS	None	DUF1456 family protein	Null	DUF1456 family protein, function unknown	Null	b2124
yehT	None	putative response regulator in two-component system withYehU	Null	Stationary phase response regulator inducing yjiY	YehU is the cognate sensor kinase for YehT. yjiY is transcriptionally regulated by the YehTU two-component system; the response regulator YehT binds the yjiY promoter and activates yjiY transcription; yjiY is strongly induced in stationary phase when cells are grown on amino acids or peptides; yhjX is repesssed by YehTU but it appears be an indirect target since tight binding of YehU to the yhjX promoter was not detected; YehTU is suggested to be part of a stationary phase control network (Kraxenberger, 2012). The YpdAB and YehTU two-component regulators are paralogous; these two systems may be interconnected since they both regulate yjiY, directly by YehTU and indirectly by YpdAB; although not noted by the authors, both sytems also regulate yhjX, indirectly by YehTU and directly by YpdAB; the putative transporter genes yhjX and yjiY are the only two genes significantly regulated by YpdAB and YehTU (Fried, 2013). Caveat: experiments using overproduction of response regulators may cause artifactual cross-talk regulation. Overproduction of YehT confers low level beta-lactam resistance.	b2125
yehU	None	inner membrane putative sensory kinase in two-component system with YehT	Putative regulator; Not classified	Stationary phase sensor kinase regulating yjiY	YehT is the cognate response regulator for YehU. yjiY is transcriptionally regulated by the YehTU two-component system; the response regulator YehT binds the yjiY promoter and activates yjiY transcription; yjiY is strongly induced in stationary phase when cells are grown on amino acids or peptides; yhjX is strongly repesssed by YehTU but it appears be an indirect target since tight binding of YehU to the yhjX promoter was not detected; YehTU is suggested to be part of a stationary phase control network (Kraxenberger, 2012). The YpdAB and YehTU two-component regulators are paralogous; these two systems may be interconnected since they both regulate yjiY, directly by YehTU and indirectly by YpdAB; although not noted by the authors, both sytems also regulate yhjX, indirectly by YehTU and directly by YpdAB; the putative transporter genes yhjX and yjiY are the only two genes significantly regulated by YpdAB and YehTU (Fried, 2013). Caveat: experiments using overproduction of response regulators may cause artifactual cross-talk regulation.	b2126
mlrA	yehV	transcriptional activator of csgD and csgBA	Regulator; Not classified	Transcriptional regulator of csgD	RpoS regulon.	b2127
yehW	None	putative ABC transporter permease	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative ABC transporter permease; osmotically and stationary phase inducible	Putative YehWXY-OsmF ABC transporter. RpoS regulon.	b2128
yehX	None	putative ABC transporter ATPase	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative ABC transporter ATPase; osmotically and stationary phase inducible	Putative YehWXY-OsmF ABC transporter. RpoS regulon. 	b2129
yehY	None	putative ABC transporter permease	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative ABC transporter permease; osmotically and stationary phase inducible	Putative YehWXY-OsmF ABC transporter. RpoS regulon.	b2130
osmF	yehZ	putative ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein	Putative transport; Not classified	Predicted periplasmic binding protein, function unknown; osmotically and stationary phase inducible; part of putative ABC transporter	The first 23 aa of osmF are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. 	b2131
bglX	glh, yohA	beta-D-glucoside glucohydrolase, periplasmic	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Periplasmic beta-glucosidase	The first 20 are a type I signal peptide; the processed mature N-terminal fragment was identified by MS as 19/219 BglX peptides matching the processed N-terminus (Maillet, 2007).	b2132
pbpG	psv, yohB	D-alanyl-D-alanine endopeptidase	Putative enzyme; Murein sacculus, peptidoglycan	Murein D-alanyl-D-alanine endopeptidase, periplasmic PBP7 and PBP8; uniquely binds beta-lactam penems, lysing non-growing cells; mutant has biofilm defect	PBP8 is an artifactual OmpT-cleaved proteolytic degradation product of PBP7. PBP7 and PBP8 are also referred to as PBP8a and PBP8b. Earlier conventions had the PBP7 and PBP8 names reversed.	b2134
yohC	None	Yip1 family inner membrane protein	Null	Inner membrane protein, Yip1 family, function unknown	Null	b2135
yohD	None	DedA family inner membrane protein	Null	DedA family inner membrane protein, function unknown	DedA superfamily proteins YqjA and YghB likely have redundant functions since only a double mutant has defects; DedA superfamily members yabI or yohD can complement the yqjA yghB double mutant when overproduced, but a dedA clone cannot complement (Thompkins, 2008). The E. coli K-12 DedA superfamily (SNARE associated Golgi protein/PF09335) has eight paralogs in two families, the COG0586 DedA/YghB family (including the DedA/YabI/YohD subfamily and the general envelope maintenance protein YghB/YqjA subfamily) and the YdjX family (including the COG0398 YdjX/YdjZ subfamily and the COG1238 YqaA subfamily) (Doerrler, 2013; K.E.R.).	b2136
yohF	yohE	putative oxidoreductase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Predicted oxidoreductase, COG1028 family; function unknown; acid sensitive, induced by ALS inhibition	RpoS regulon.	b2137
mdtQ'	yohG, yohH	pseudogene	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction, lipoprotein drug pump OMF family; putative outer membrane factor (OMF) component of tripartite efflux system; mutants are sensitive to acriflavin and puromycin; tolC paralog	TolC, MdtQ, MdtP and CusC are paralogs. The first 21 aa of MdtQ' are predicted to be a type II signal peptide. An apparent frameshift at codon 51 has been reconstructed. A mutant phenotype has been reported, perhaps from a strain lacking this apparent frameshift mutation (Sulavik, 2001). Intact alleles are present in many E. coli strains, e.g. strain 53638 (GenBank g75514522).	b2139
dusC	yohI	tRNA-dihydrouridine synthase C	Enzyme; tRNA modification	tRNA-dihydrouridine synthase C	Null	b2140
yohJ	None	UPF0299 family inner membrane protein	Null	UPF0299 family inner membrane protein, function unknown	YohJ is a membrane protein with four transmembrane helices (Daley, 2005).	b2141
yohK	None	LrgB family inner membrane protein	Putative transport; Not classified	Inner membrane protein, LrgB family, function unknown; S. aureus ortholog missing a murein hydrolase, possibly due to protein transport defect; six TM segment predicted inner membrane protein homologus to known transporters	Null	b2142
sanA	sfiX(St), yeiF	DUF218 superfamily vancomycin high temperature exclusion protein	Transport; Drug/analog sensitivity	Vancomycin high temperature exclusion protein; DUF218 superfamily protein	A sanA mutant becomes vancomycin-permeable at 42C (Rida, 1996). ydcF and elyC(ycbC) (COG1434) and sanA and ygjQ (COG2949) are four members of the DUF218 superfamily (PF02698). The Salmonella sanA ortholog sfiX is a suppressor of cell division inhibition and is also required for vancomycin resistance at high temperature (Mouslim, 1998).	b2144
yeiG	None	S-formylglutathione hydrolase	Enzyme; Formaldehyde degradation	S-formylglutathione hydrolase, formaldehyde degradation; S-lactoylglutathione hydrolase, may be involved in methylglyoxal detoxification in the cytoplasm; constitutively expressed, not induced by formaldehyde	YeiG and FrmB are 50% identical paralogs; double mutant is formaldehyde sensitive. YeiG also has p-nitrophenyl C2-C6 fatty acid ester and a-naphthyl acetate carboxylesterase activities in vitro. The amino terminal half of YeiG is homologous to the C-terminal half of YieL. S9 peptidase family; YeiG or FrmB are not in MEROPS yet, but it has homologs. The yeiG-folEyeiB divergent operon promoter region binds ArcA (Federowicz. 2014).	b2154
yeiH	None	UPF0324 family inner membrane protein	Null	Inner membrane protein, UPF0324 family, function unknown	Null	b2158
yeiI	None	putative kinase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Predicted sugar kinase, function unknown	Null	b2160
nupX	yeiJ	nucleoside permease	Putative transport; Not classified	Nucleoside permease; in operon with rihB; silent (uninduced) gene	NupX (YeiJ) was reported to be a nucleoside transporter, and to be co-expressed with rihB (as indicated by polarity of an IS50 insertion upstream of rihB on nupX (yeiJ) expression, B. Mygind and C. Petersen, preliminary results cited in Petersen (2001). nupC, nupX, and yegT are paralogs. CNT family.	b2161
rihB	yeiK	ribonucleoside hydrolase 2	Null	Ribonucleoside hydrolase, pyrimidine specific; silent gene; in operon with nupX nucleoside transporter; induced by AI-2 pheromone	Null	b2162
yeiL	None	nitrogen starvation viability factor; putative ColA sensitivity effector; putative Crp-Fnr family transcriptional regulator	Putative regulator; Not classified	Putative ColA sensitivity effector; nitrogen starvation viability factor; putative CRP-FNR family transcriptional regulator; Fe-S cluster; autoregulator	A yeiL mutant has reduced viability during nitrogen starvation; yeiL is in the RpoS, FNR, IHF and Lrp regulons and is positively autoregulated; YeiL has one iron-sulfur cluster and one disulfide bond; the yeiL promoter overlaps that of divergent gene yeiK (Anjum, 2000). A yeiL::kan mutant from the Keio collection is completely resistance to colicin ColA but could not be complemented with the yeiL ASKA clone probably due to insolubility of overproduced YeiL (Sharma, 2009).	b2163
psuT	pscT, yeiM	putative nucleoside transporter	Putative transport; Not classified	Predicted pseudouridine transporter	psuKGT are not to be confused with mutations previously labeled psu before they were mapped to ORFs, namely (1) the psu polarity suppressor mutations that were found to map the the rho gene encoding the Rho protein, and (2) the pleiotropic suppressor psu mutations (<A HREF="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed?term=8380152" target="v">Ephrati-Elizur, 1993</A>) that have never been mapped to an ORF. psuT, nupC, nupX, and yegT are paralogs. CNT family.	b2164
psuG	pscG, yeiN	pseudouridine 5'-phosphate glycosidase	Enzyme; pseudouridine catabolism	Pseudouridine 5'-phosphate glycosidase; pseudouridine utilization	PsuG was characterized in E. coli UT189 (Preumont, 2008). PsuG also catalyzes the reverse reaction, of no known physiological significance, that was probably the enzyme previously described as a pseudouridylate synthetase (synthase) whose activity was correlated with pseudouridine utilization in various strains of E. coli and that was found to be sensitive to catabolite repression (Preumont, 2008; Solomon, 1971; Breitman, 1970). psuKGT are not to be confused with mutations previously labeled psu before they were mapped to ORFs, namely (1) the psu polarity suppressor mutations that were found to map the the rho gene encoding the Rho protein, and (2) the pleiotropic suppressor psu mutations (<A HREF="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed?term=8380152" target="v">Ephrati-Elizur, 1993</A>) that have never been mapped to an ORF.	b2165
setB	yeiO	lactose/glucose efflux system	Orf; Not classified	Glucose and lactose efflux transporter	Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS).	b2170
yeiP	None	elongation factor P-like protein	Null	Elongation factor P-like protein, function unknown; low abundance protein	yeiP is a non-essential gene. 	b2171
yeiQ	None	putative NAD-dependent D-mannonate oxidoreductase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Predicted D-mannonate oxidoreductase, NAD-dependent	MtlD, UxaB, UxuB, YdfI and YeiQ are all COG0246/PF01232 members encoding known or predicted mannitol/altrunate-related sugar oxidoreductases. UxuB, YdfI and YeiQ are all part of the UxuB sub-family of mannonate oxidoreductases. The yeiQ promoter region binds FNR and Arc; ArcA represses yeiQ expression (Federowicz, 2014).	b2172
yejA	None	microcin C ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein	Null	Microcin C ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein; regulated by rydC sRNA	YejABEF microcin C ABC transport system. The first 19 aa are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b2177
yejB	None	microcin C ABC transporter permease	Putative transport; Not classified	Microcin C ABC transporter permease; regulated by rydC sRNA	Null	b2178
yejE	None	microcin C ABC transporter permease	Putative transport; Not classified	Microcin C ABC transporter permease; regulated by rydC sRNA	YejABEF microcin C ABC transport system.	b2179
yejF	None	microcin C ABC transporter ATPase	Putative transport; Not classified	Microcin C ABC transporter ATPase; regulated by rydC sRNA	YejABEF microcin C ABC transport system.	b2180
yejG	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	YejG family prototype, function unknown	The yejG promoter region binds ArcA and yejG expression is repressed by ArcA (Federowicz, 2014). YejG and ArcB were found to interact using yeast two-hybrids (Rajagopala, 2014).	b2181
yejL	None	UPF0352 family protein	Null	UPF0352 family protein, function unknown	Null	b2187
rsuA	yejD	16S rRNA pseudouridine(516) synthase	Enzyme; rRNA modification	16S rRNA pseudouridine(516) synthase	RsuA is a survival protein required for MazF-mediated survival of a small subpopulation after inhibition of translation (Amitai, 2009).	b2183
yejH	yejI, yejJ	putative ATP-dependent DNA or RNA helicase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Predicted ATP-dependent DNA or RNA helicase, function unknown	Over-expression of cloned yejH induces filamentation (Burke, 2013).	b2184
yejK	ndpA	spermidine nucleoid-associated protein	Null	Spermidine nucleoid-associated protein, function unknown	Null	b2186
yejM	yejN	essential inner membrane DUF3413 domain-containing protein; lipid A production and membrane permeability factor	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Essential inner membrane DUF3413 domain protein; lipid A defect; membrane permeability defect	A nonsense mutation making a truncated YejM causes increased outer membrane permeability, TS growth, and reduced lipid A synthesis; these phenotypes, and the lethality of a null mutation, are suppressible by a multicopy acpT clone (Hirvas, 1997; Nurminen, 1997; De Lay, 2008). YejM is an inner membrane protein with an N-terminal membrane domain (PF11893) and a predicted C-terminal domain shared with many sulfatases (Pfam PF00884).	b2188
yejO'	None	pseudogene, autotransporter outer membrane homology	Putative transport; Not classified	Pseudogene reconstruction, autotransporter homolog; interrupted by IS5K	IS5K inserted at codon 21 and made a 4 bp target site duplication TTAT. The first 29 aa are predicted to be a signal peptide. Uninterrupted versions are present (with allelic polymorphisms) in all Shigella strains and in several non-K-12 E. coli strains, e.g. O157:H7 and CFT073, although this highly likely alternative start site is not annotated in any of them.	b2190
ccmH	yejP	heme lyase, CcmH subunit	Putative enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Electron transport	Heme lyase, with CcmF, required for transfer of heme to apocytochrome from heme-CcmE	Null	b2194
dsbE	ccmG, yejQ	periplasmic thioredoxin of cytochrome c-type biogenesis	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Electron transport	Thiol-disulfide interchange protein, cytochrome C biogenesis; membrane-anchored, periplasmic; thioredoxin homolog	CcmG (DsbE) is located in the periplasm, attached to the inner membrane by a 28 aa signal anchor.	b2195
ccmF	yejR	heme lyase, CcmF subunit	Putative enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Electron transport	Heme lyase, with CcmH, required for transfer of heme to apocytochrome from heme-CcmE	Overexpression causes a decrease in the amount of biofilm formed.	b2196
ccmE	yejS	periplasmic heme chaperone	Putative enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Electron transport	Heme chaperone, membrane-anchored, periplasmic	CcmE makes a transient covalent linkage to heme at His-130 and then transfers heme to apocytochrome C in the presence of CcmFGH. Overexpression causes abnormal biofilm architecture. CcmE has a 29 aa signal anchor.	b2197
ccmC	yejT, yejU	heme export ABC transporter permease; CcmE-interacting protein	Transport; Protein, peptide secretion	Heme export ABC transporter permease; delivers heme to and interacts with CcmE	Null	b2199
ccmB	yejV	heme export ABC transporter permease	Transport; Protein, peptide secretion	Heme export ABC transporter permease	Null	b2200
ccmA	yejW	heme export ABC transporter ATPase	Transport; Protein, peptide secretion	Heme export ABC transporter ATPase	Null	b2201
napC	yejX	quinol dehydrogenase, electron source for NapAB	Putative enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Electron transport	Quinol dehydrogenase, electron source for NapAB; membrane-bound; bound hemes	NapC is essential for electron transfer from both ubiquinol and menaquinol to NapAB. NapC also has ferric reductase activity (Gescher, 2008).	b2202
napB	yejY	nitrate reductase, small, cytochrome C550 subunit, periplasmic	Carrier; Energy metabolism, carbon: Electron transport	Nitrate reductase, periplasmic	Null	b2203
napH	yejZ	ferredoxin-type protein	Carrier; Energy metabolism, carbon: Electron transport	Quinol dehydrogenase, membrane protein; polyferredoxin; mediates electron transfer from ubiquinol/naphthoquinone to NapAB, via NapC; non-haem, iron-sulfur protein	NapH is a four TM helix membrane protein, N- and C-in, with cytoplasmic C-terminal iron-sulfur cluster domain, using fusions and Westerns blots (Brondijk, 2002). NapH not required for menaquinol transfer (Brondijk, 2002). napH and yccM are paralogs.	b2204
napG	yojA, yojB	ferredoxin-type protein	Carrier; Energy metabolism, carbon: Electron transport	Quinol dehydrogenase, periplasmic protein; mediates electron transfer from ubiquinol/naphthoquinone to NapAB, via NapC; non-haem, iron-sulfur protein	NapG is not required for menaquinol transfer (Brondijk, 2002, 2004). Verified Tat substrate: NapG has a Tat-only (Class I) predicted 41 aa signal peptide (Brondijk, 2004; Tullman-Ercek, 2007). 	b2205
napA	yojC, yojD, yojE	nitrate reductase, periplasmic, large subunit	Putative enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Nitrate reductase, periplasmic	Verified Tat substrate: NapA has a Tat-only (Class I) 36 aa signal peptide (Tullman-Ercek, 2007).	b2206
napF	yojG	ferredoxin-type protein, role in electron transfer to periplasmic nitrate reductase NapA	Carrier; Energy metabolism, carbon: Electron transport	Required for NapAB nitrate-dependent growth with ubiquinone; not essential for electron transfer from ubiquinol or menaquinol to NapAB (Brondijk, 2002); may have energy-conservng role in ubiquinol oxidation; non-haem, iron-sulfur protein	NapF is located in the cytoplasm and physically interacts with NapA (Nilavongse, 2006). A small putative protein gene yojO was predicted upstream of napF (Hemm, 2008). The annotation of yojO has been removed as it is unlikely to be a protein-coding gene; the apparent conservation in this region seems to be due to DNA conservation of the napF transcription factor binding sites.	b2208
mqo	yojH	malate dehydrogenase, FAD/NAD(P)-binding domain	Null	Malate oxidoreductase; possibly previously described FAD-dependent phospholipid-activated malate oxidase	MQO activity is regulated by ArcA-ArcB regulatory system, carbon catabolite and growth phase (expressed in exponential phase with rapid degredation in stationary phase). Growth on pyruvate and acetate media resulted in high MQO activity while glucose media resulted in low activity, however, elevated MQO activity on glucose media in delta-arcA cells has been reported. Over expression of mqo results in depressed growth rates; deletion of mqo is reported to have no phenotype. Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004).	b2210
yojI	yojJ	microcin J25 efflux ABC transporter permease/ATPase	Putative transport; Not classified	Microcin J25 efflux ABC transporter permease/ATPase; TolC-dependent	Overexpressed YojI confers Microcin J25 resistance and a yojI mutation confers Microcin J25 sensitivity. YojI is homologous to ABC-type transporter permease and ATP-binding components. No other overexpression resistance was found among 26 inhibitors tested. yojI is positively regulated by ppGpp resulting in microcin J25 resistance (Pomares, 2008).	b2211
apbE	yojK, yojL	putative thiamine-synthetic flavin transferase lipoprotein	Null	Putative flavin transferase, lipoprotein	ApbE is probably required for a covalent flavination of conserved residues Thr187 in RsxD and Thr174 in RsxG with FMN, which then are likely to be required for the reduction of the 4Fe-4S cluster in ThiC in addition to the known Rsx function to reduce the 2Fe-2S cluster in SoxR. ApbE of Vibrio harveyi is a flavin transferase required for the covalent flavinylation of NqrC, an RsxG homolog, with FMN at position Thr229 (Bertsova, 2013). Vibrio cholerae RnfD (RsxD homolog) and RnfG (RsxG homolog) are covalently FMN flavinylated at residues Thr187 and Thr175, respectively (Backiel, 2008). Vibrio alginolyticus NqrC (RsxG homolog) and NqrB (RsxD homolog) are covalently FMN flavinylated at residues Thr223 and Thr235, respectively (Hayashi, 2001). ApbE of Salmonella typhimurium is required for the assembly or repair of 4Fe-4S clusters (Skovran, 2003). An apbE mutant of Salmonella typhimurium is blocked for thiamine biosynthesis at the ThiC step (conversion of AIR to HMP) and Salmonella ApbE is anchored to the inner membrane in a periplasmic location; the periplasmic location, but not the membrane anchor, is required for ApbE function (Beck, 1998; Beck, 1999). Purified E. coli ApbE is dimeric and, unlike the ApbE superfamily member TP0796 from Treponema pallidum, E. coli ApbE does not possess FAD pyrophosphatase activity in vitro (Deca, 2013). The structure of the S. enterica ApbE has a bound FAD molecule (Boyd, 2011). The first 19 aa of ApbE constitute a type II signal peptide.	b2214
mokC	gefL	regulatory protein for HokC, overlaps CDS of hokC	Null	Overlapping regulatory peptide, enables hokC expression	MokC translation enables HokC translation when MokC is not inhibited by the sokC sRNA.	b0018
nikA	hydC, hydD	nickel/heme ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Cations	Nickel/heme ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein	NikA binds hemin and protoporphyrin IX (Shepherd, 2007). NikA binds nickel as Ni-(L-His)(2) (Chivers, 2012). Mutants display nickel-remediated formate hydrogen-lyase, hydrogenase, and hydrogenase-related fumarase defects. FNR regulon. Although previously suggested to be a Tar-dependent Ni-repellant chemosensor, NikA is not involved in the Ni(2+) repellant chemotactic response (de Pina, 1996; Englert, 2010).	b3476
nikB	hydC, hydD	nickel ABC transporter permease	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Cations	Nickel ABC transporter permease	Mutants display nickel-remediated formate hydrogen-lyase, hydrogenase, and hydrogenase-related fumarase defects.	b3477
nikC	hydC, hydD	nickel ABC transporter permease	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Cations	Nickel ABC transporter permease	Mutants display nickel-remediated formate hydrogen-lyase, hydrogenase, and hydrogenase-related fumarase defects.	b3478
nikD	hydC, hydD	nickel ABC transporter ATPase	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Cations	Nickel ABC transporter ATPase	Mutants display nickel-remediated formate hydrogen-lyase, hydrogenase, and hydrogenase-related fumarase defects.	b3479
nikE	hydC, hydD	nickel ABC transporter ATPase	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Cations	Nickel ABC transporter ATPase	Mutants display nickel-remediated formate hydrogen-lyase, hydrogenase, and hydrogenase-related fumarase defects. Overexpression causes abnormal biofilm architecture.	b3480
recX	oraA	regulatory protein for RecA	Putative regulator; Not classified	Blocks RecA filament extension; inhibitor of RecA ATPase, recombinase and coprotease activities; null mutant and over-expressors have reduced resistance to DNA damage; binding to RecA is antagonized by RecF	RecX (negative) directly competes with DinI (positive) as modulators of RecA function. LexA regulon.	b2698
ppdA	None	putative prepilin peptidase-dependent protein	Putative structural component; Surface structures	Predicted prepilin peptidase-dependent protein; FlhDC- and FliA-regulated	The N-terminus of PpdA contains an N-terminal cleavage/methylation motif G-YXXXE (PF07963); the first 6 residues of PpdA may be cleaved by prepilin peptidase, making an N-terminal N-methyltyrosine in the process. Overexpression of ppdA causes abnormal biofilm architecture (Tenorio, 2003). ppdA is in the flagella and motility regulon and is both FliA- and FlhDC-regulated; overexpression or deletion of ppdA does not affect motlity or chemotaxis (Park, 2001). ppdA is predicted to have a CRP-S promoter co-regulated by both Crp and Sxy (Cameron, 2006).	b2826
nuoA	None	NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase, membrane subunit A	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Aerobic respiration	NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase subunit A, complex I; NADH dehydrogenase I	Null	b2288
nuoB	None	NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase, chain B	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Aerobic respiration	NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase subunit B, complex I; NADH dehydrogenase I	NuoB has iron-sulfur cluster N2. HT_Cmplx18_Mem: NuoB+NuoC.	b2287
nuoC	nuoCD, nuoD	NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase, fused CD subunit	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Aerobic respiration	NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase, fused CD subunit, complex I; NADH dehydrogenase I	Leif (1995) find the starting amino acids at codon +4 (MVNN), in conflict with the more recent data of David (2002), which does not include these 4 amino acids and the initial Met. Alignment with Yersinia NuoC supports the second ATG annotated here. The reason for the discrepancy is not known as both used native protein preparations, although the protein band sequenced by Leif et al. was not the correct MW for the revised, fused NuoCD protein sequence and Leif used an E. coli B strain. HT_Cmplx18_Mem: NuoB+NuoC.	b2286
nuoE	None	NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase, chain E	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Aerobic respiration	NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase subunit E, complex I; NADH dehydrogenase I	Null	b2285
nuoG	None	NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase, chain G	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Aerobic respiration	NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase subunit G, complex I; NADH dehydrogenase I	The 52 nt nuoF-nuoG intergenic mRNA region has a widely conserved RNA hairpin structure of nknown function termed "nuoG RNA" (Weinberg, 2010). Leif et al. (95) report that the initial Met is not clipped, in conflict with Link et al. (97), who found it was clipped. M-A is almost always clipped, so Link et al. seems to be the more reliable data.	b2283
nuoH	None	NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase, membrane subunit H	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Aerobic respiration	NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase subunit H, complex I; NADH dehydrogenase I	Null	b2282
nuoI	None	NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase, chain I	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Aerobic respiration	NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase subunit I, complex I; NADH dehydrogenase I	Null	b2281
nuoJ	None	NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase, membrane subunit J	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Aerobic respiration	NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase subunit J, complex I; NADH dehydrogenase I	Null	b2280
nuoK	None	NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase, membrane subunit K	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Aerobic respiration	NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase subunit K, complex I; NADH dehydrogenase I	Null	b2279
nuoL	None	NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase, membrane subunit L	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Aerobic respiration	NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase subunit L, complex I; NADH dehydrogenase I; NuoL facilitates the uptake of Na(+), is homologus to antiporters, and is implicated in proton pumping	NuoL and NuoM are located at the distal end of the membrane arm. the redox centers are in the peripheral arm.	b2278
nuoN	None	NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase, membrane subunit N	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Aerobic respiration	NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase subunit N, complex I; NADH dehydrogenase I	Revised ATG start codon supported by mutagenesis and sequence conservation.	b2276
sgrR	yabN	transcriptional DNA-binding transcriptional activator of sgrS sRNA	Transport; Not classified	Transcriptional activator of sgrS sRNA; sgrS destabilizes ptsG mRNA	Null	b0069
secG	prlH	preprotein translocase membrane subunit	Transport; Protein, peptide secretion	SecYEG inner membrane translocon secA-interacting subunit; preprotein translocase secAYEG subunit; preprotein translocase secAYEG subunit	SecG complexes with and assists the SecYE core translocon to interact with SecA to export proteins as part of the secAYEG preprotein translocase. SecYEG complex interacts with SecDFyajC to form a hexameric holocomplex. N-terminus is blocked.	b3175
chpB	chpBK, yjfE	toxin of the ChpB-ChpS toxin-antitoxin system	Putative factor; Not classified	ChpB toxin and mRNA interferase, antitoxin is ChpS; reversible inhibitor of translation, by mRNA cleavage	ChpB(ChpBK) is a sequence-specific (ACY) endoribonuclease.	b4225
yfiH	None	UPF0124 family protein	Null	Function unknown, UPF0124 family	Probable false positive lipoprotein prediction, Cys not conserved. yfiH is probably the second gene in the rluD-yfiH operon. otherPDB (S.flexneri): 1XAF. Although PDB 1XAF is derived from the E. coli strain Shigella flexneri 2a str. 2457T, it only differs from the K-12 alelle by two amino acids (Kim, 2006).	b2593
rluD	sfhB, yfiI	23S rRNA pseudouridine(1911,1915,1917) synthase	Enzyme; rRNA modification	23S rRNA pseudouridine(1911,1915,1917) synthase; mutation suppresses ftsH(Ts) mutants; null mutants grow very poorly in K-12 only	The very poor growth of rluD mutants in E. coli K-12 can be suppressed by a point mutation in prfB and a role in translation termination for the 23S rRNA helix 69 pseudouridines has been demonstrated (Ejby, 2007). The very poor growth of rluD deletions in all E. coli K-12 strains is due to their having a mutant prfB gene with Thr246 instead of the Ala246 or Ser246 found in all other E. coli and Salmonella strains; rluD deletions have little effect on growth or stop codon recognition in a prfB Ala246 background (Dreyfus, 2011; O'Connor, 2011; Schaub, 2011). The very poor growth of rluD mutants in E. coli K-12 is due to increased translational readthrough and can be suppressed by point mutations in prfB or prfC (O'Connor, 2011). The very poor growth of rluD prfB mutants in E. coli K-12 is largely due to rpsG translation readthrough (and polar effects) and can be suppressed by restoring the rpsG stop codon, which is mutated to a Leu codon n K-12, leading to a 23 aa extension of ribosomal protein S7 (Dreyfus, 2011; Schaub, 2011).	b2594
efp	None	polyproline-specific translation elongation factor EF-P	Factor; Proteins - translation and modification	Polyproline-specific translation elongation factor EF-P	Lysine34-lysylated EF-P functions to unblock translation stalled at polyproline; the maximal stalling effect of polyproline is seen with three consecutive prolines, although Pro-Pro-Gly also blocked translation in the absence of EF-P (Doerfel, 2012; Ude, 2012). epmC(yfcM) mutants do not display the pleiotropic and slow-growth phenotypes observed for epmAB or efp mutants in either E. coli or Salmonella, suggesting that the EpmC-mediated modification of EF-P is is not required for the translation of polyproline-containing proteins, the function of EF-P requiring the EpmAB-mediated lysine34 lysylation (Bullwinkle, 2012). EF-P is present at one copy per ten ribosomes (An, 1980). efp has been reported to be an essential gene (Aoki, 1997) and to be a non-essential gene (Baba, 2006). The S. typhi efp gene is non-essential (Langridge, 2009). EF-P is homologous to eukaryotic initiation factor eIF-5A (Kyrpides, 1998). The previously reported function of EF-P to stimulate initial peptide bond formation has been recently challenged and appears not to be a critical function of EF-P (Ganoza, 2000; Blaha, 2009; Bullwinkle, 2012). The crystal structure of EF-P from T. thermophilus (PDB:1UEB) shows that, like other translation factors, EF-P is a tRNA mimic (Hanawa-Suetsugu, 2004). The T. thermophilus crystal structure of EF-P bound to ribosomes (PDB:3HUW) shows that the tRNA-like EF-P does not bind to tRNA binding sites in the ribosome, but rather binds between the P-site and the E-site, although footprinting experiments had previously shown binding to the A-site (Aoki, 2008; Blaha, 2009). EF-P appears to assist in the proper positioning of the fMet-tRNA for the formation of the first peptide bond (Aoki, 2008; Blaha, 2009). An earlier report that EF-P Lys34 is modified with spermidine has been refuted; the Lys34 is modified with lysine (Aoki, 2008 ; Yanagisawa, 2010). A Lys reside in eucaryotic eIF5A homologous to EF-P Lys34 is modified with hypusine (Chen, 1997). EpmA(YjeA) and EpmB(YjeK) are required to modify EF-P Lys34 by lysylation of the epsilon amino group; failure to modify EF-P with lysine results in a slow growth defect; EpmB(YjeK) may convert alpha-lysyl-EF-P to beta-lysyl-EF-P (Yanagisawa, 2010). EpmA(YjeA) and EpmB(YjeK) were predicted to be responsible for the modification of EF-P-Lys34 with spermidine, but Lys34 is actually modified with another lysine, not spermidine; epmB(yjeK) is in the efp genetic neighborhood in many strains and all genomes that have the conserved Lys34 in EF-P have epmB(yjeK) orthologs; EpmB(YjeK) is a lysine 2,3-aminomutase homolog (but in a different clade) (Bailly, 2010; Yanagisawa, 2010). Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004). A third and final EF-P post-translation modification enzyme EpmC(YfcM) is identified as EF-P-Lys34 hydroxylase; EpmC(YfcM) acts after beta-lysinylation of Lys34 by EpmA(YjeA) and EpmB(YjeK); EpmC(YfcM) adds an oxygen atom to the C5 position of Lys34 and does not modify the added beta-lysine; YjeA and YjeK were renamed as EpmA and EpmB, respectively (Peil, 2012).	b4147
tktB	None	transketolase 2, thiamine triphosphate-binding	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Non-oxidative branch, pentose pathway	Transketolase B; binds Zn(II)	Consistently co-purifies with the degradosome.	b2465
feoA	None	ferrous iron transporter, protein A	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Cations	Ferrous iron uptake, required for full FeoB activity	FeoA has an SH3-like domain; the FeoB GTPase activity is stimulated 5-fold by KCl and is not stimulated by FeoA addition (Lau, 2013). The FeoA role in ferrous iron uptake is undetermined, but a requirement was demonstrated by Taudte, Ph.D. thesis, 2003, Martin Luther University, cited in (Grass, 2006). Fur regulon. FNR regulon.	b3408
feoB	None	ferrous iron transporter protein B and GTP-binding protein; membrane protein	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Cations	Putative ferrous iron permease with GTP-binding domain	The FeoB GTPase activity is stimulated 5-fold by KCl and is not stimulated by FeoA addition (Lau, 2013). The GTPase actvity of the FeoB N-terminal G domain is required for ferrous iron uptake; it slowly hydrolyzes its bound GTP. FeoB may be a primordial archetype of G protein-regulated membrane proteins. Fur regulon. FNR regulon. An feoB mutant is unable to colonize the mouse intestine.	b3409
gapC'	None	pseudogene, GAP dehydrogenase	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction, GAP dehydrogenase; glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase C	A stop codon at codon 39 is changed to a Lys; a frameshift at codon 249 was reconstructed. An intact 333 aa GapC protein is Z2304 from O157:H7.	b4493
yeiR	None	Zn-stimulated GTPase involved in zinc homeostasis; mutants are cadmium and EDTA sensitive; Zn(2+) binding protein	Enzyme; Not classified	Zn-stimulated GTPase involved in zinc homeostasis; mutants are cadmium and EDTA sensitive; Zn(2+) binding protein	YeiR binds Zn(2+) with nanomolar affinity causing oligimerization and stimulating GTPase activty; a yeiR mutant is depleted for zinc and is EDTA and cadmium sensitive (Blaby-Haas, 2012). COG0523. CobW homolog.	b2173
yeiE	None	putative DNA-binding transcriptional regulator	Putative regulator; Not classified	Putative positive regulator of lysP transcription	Induction of yeiE increases lysP expression (Fujii, 2002). Deletion of yeiE does not affect lysP expression (Ruiz, 2011). LysR family.	b2157
hofB	hopB	T2SE secretion family protein; P-loop ATPase superfamily protein	Putative transport; Not classified	T2SE family predicted protein secretion protein; predicted P-loop ATPase, function unknown	HofB(HopB) has GspE-like N-terminal T2SE-Nter (PF05157) and central T2SE (PF00437) domains; HofB also has a conserved Pfam-B 498 C-terminal domain (PB000498). An unrelated hopB gene (for host function of plasmid maintenance) mappng near but not in gyrB is defective in stable maintenance of the mini-F plasmid, has not yet been mapped to a coding region, and has sometimes been confused with this hopB gene (Niki, 1988; Ogura, 1990). gspE, hofB and yggR are paralogs.	b0107
ppdD	None	putative prepilin peptidase-dependent pilin	Putative structural component; Surface structures	Predicted prepilin peptidase-dependent pilin	PpdD is a predicted pilin (PF00114). The N-terminus of PpdD contains an N-terminal cleavage/methylation motif G-FXXXE (PF13544); the first 6 residues of PpdD may be cleaved by prepilin peptidase, making an N-terminal N-methylphenylalanine in the process. ppdD has been demonstrated to have a CRP-S promoter co-regulated by both Crp and Sxy (Cameron, 2006).	b0108
norR	ygaA	anaerobic nitric oxide reductase DNA-binding transcriptional activator	Regulator; Not classified	Transcription regulator for norVW, NO-responsive; Sigma54-dependent activator with a GAF domain	Null	b2709
ydcF	None	DUF218 superfamily protein, SAM-binding	Null	DUF218 family SAM-binding protein, function unknown; low abundance protein	ydcF and elyC(ycbC) (COG1434) and sanA and ygjQ (COG2949) are four members of the DUF218 superfamily (PF02698). YdcF has an alpha/beta-fold characteristic of nucleotide-utilizing enzymes (Chao, 2008).	b1414
nlpD	None	activator of AmiC murein hydrolase activity, lipoprotein	Enzyme; Murein sacculus, peptidoglycan; membrane; Macromolecule synthesis, modification: Lipoprotein	Activator of AmiC murein hydrolase activity, lipoprotein	NlpD activates AmiC-mediated in vitro murein cleavage; nlpD and amiC mutants have the same phenotype, resulting from an AmiC defect (Uehara, 2010). NlpD is localized to the septal ring (Uehara, 2009). An nlpD single mutant displays a short-cell phenotype, 2.5 micrometers long vs 4.0 for wt, and a nlpD mutation exacerbates the envC mutant filamentous phenotype in an nlpD envC double mutant, from 2 to 12 septa/cell for the double mutant (Uehara, 2009). NlpD has an M23 metalloprotease domain. NlpD binds Congo Red dye, as does its homolog Haemophilus somnus LppB outer membrane antigen, which is also a possible virulence determinant. NlpD, YgeR, MepM(YebA) and EnvC have C-terminal LytM domains; mutating all four LytM domain genes produces a strain with a severe filamentous phenotype, similar to an amiABC triple mutant, of over 20 times the normal cell length and more than 70 times the normal amount of septa/cell, from 0.5 to 36 septa/cell; also similar to the amiABC mutant, the nlpD-envC-mepM(yebA)-ygeR mutant has altered morphology and delayed onset of lysis after beta-lactam antibiotic treatment (Uehara, 2009).	b2742
alpA	None	CP4-57 prophage; DNA-binding transcriptional activator	IS, phage, Tn; Phage or Prophage Related	Alp protease, CP4-57 putative defective prophage; regulates intA (slp [suppressor of Lon])	Null	b2624
hofQ	hopQ	DNA catabolic putative fimbrial transporter	Putative transport; Not classified	Required for the utilization of DNA as a carbon source; H. influenzae competence protein ComE homolog	Null	b3391
prfC	miaD, sra, srb, tos	peptide chain release factor RF-3	Factor; Proteins - translation and modification	Peptide chain release factor 3, RF-3; stimulates activity of RF-1 and RF-2	RF3 exits in two conformational states, state 1 which is a pre-translocation complex with a P-site tRNA and a pre-bound RF3 (inactive) while state 2 is a post-translocation conformation with RF3 tightly bound to the GTPase center and the tRNA at the exit site. RF-3 is a class 2 RF, and a G-protein. The very poor growth of rluD deletions in all E. coli K-12 strains is due to their having a mutant (or variant) prfB gene with Thr246 instead of the Ala246 or Ser246 found in other E. coli and Salmonella strains; rluD deletions have little effect on growth or stop codon recognition in a prfB Ala246 background (O'Connor, 2011). The very poor growth of rluD mutants in E. coli K-12 can be suppressed by point mutations in prfB or prfC (O'Connor, 2011).	b4375
yjjG	None	dUMP phosphatase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Nucleotides	Noncanonical pyrimidine nucleotide house-cleaning phosphatase; dUMP phosphatase activity	Efficient in vitro substrates include: dUMP, UMP, and dTMP; phosphoramidase: in vitro activities demonstrated by Kuznetsova et al. (2005, 2006). yjjG mutants are sensitive to 5-fluoropyrimidine derivatives, such as 5-fluoro-2'-deoxyuridine (Titz, 2007). YjjG has a strict metal requirement for catalytic activity. Poorly utilized substrates include UDP, TDP and a variety of nucleotide monophosphates. A yjjG mutation blocks the utilization of thymine to feed a thyA auxotroph since it must first be converted to thymidine and dUMP dephosphorylated by YjjG is needed for that conversion (Weiss, 2006). YjjG is also called nucleoside 5'-monophosphate phosphohydrolase. HAD superfamily.	b4374
acrR	ybaH	transcriptional repressor	Regulator; Drug/analog sensitivity	Transcriptional repressor for acrAB	TetR family.	b0464
ychJ	None	UPF0225 family protein	Null	UPF0225 family protein 	YchJ has two copies of the SEC-C (PF02810) domain found at the C-terminus of the SecA protein, one at the C-terminus and one at the N-terminus; the SEC-C domain binds zinc which is required for the binding of the chaperone SecB to the SEC-C domain of SecA; the SEC-C domain has also been predicted to be involved in nucleic acid binding although SecA is not known to be a nucleic acid binding protein.	b1233
rssA	ychK	putative patatin-like family phospholipase	Null	Predicted phospholipase, patatin-like family, function unknown	The patatin-like family (also known as the NTE family) pfam01734 contains proteins with a predicted phospholipase domain. YjjU and RssA(YchK) are distant homologs of the pfam01734 superfamily; RssA (COG1752 family) appears to be a core gene while YjjU (COG4667 family) appears to be a horizontal transfer. A previous report of unpublished data reporting an rssA mutant has elevated RpoS levels is due to polarity on rssB (Muffler, 1996; Ruiz, 2001).	b1234
rssB	hnr, mviA(S.t.), sprE, verA, ychL	PcnB-degradosome interaction factor; response regulator	Regulator; Basic proteins - synthesis, modification	Response regulator binding RpoS to initiate proteolysis by ClpXP; required for the PcnB-degradosome interaction during stationary phase; major cognate sensor kinase is ArcB	The protyolysis initiated by RssB binding to RpoS is inhibited by three anti-RssB anti-adaptor proteins IraP, IraM, and IraD in response to different stresses (Bougdour, 2006; Bougdour, 2008). RssB and ArcA are both phosphorylated by the ArcA sensor histidine protein kinase as part of a three-component system (Mika, 2005). RssB-initiated protyolysis of RpoS does not require the RssB response regulator phosphorylation site (Peterson, 2004). A yliE rssB9(hnr) double null mutant has significantly increased lycopene production in 1X M9; the effect may be salt-suppressible as it is not seen in 2X M9 (Alper, 2008). RssB is not a transcriptional regulator and does not have a DNA-binding domain typical of most response regulators. RssB(SprE) is required to maintain the association of PcnB with the degradosome during stationary phase (Carabetta, 2010).	b1235
yggI	sprT	Zn-dependent metalloprotease-related protein	Null	Zn-dependent metalloprotease-related protein, function unknown	YggI was named SprT and described as a regulator of the bolA gene in stationary phase in GenBank D83644 by R. Utsumi and T. Suzuki, unpublished, 1996, but nothing has ever been published so this might be incorrect. YggI appears to have a conserved Zn-binding domain found in many metalloproteases (Pfam PF10263).	b2944
lrhA	genR, hexA(E.c.)	transcriptional repressor of flagellar, motility and chemotaxis genes	Regulator; Energy metabolism, carbon: Aerobic respiration	Transcriptional repressor of motility master regulator flhDC; autoregulator	LysR family. A lrhA mutation confers lower RpoS levels and modulates rssB activity. LhrA is upstream of the nuo operon, but is not part of the nuo operon and does not regulate the nuo operon.	b2289
hisJ	None	histidine ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	Histidine ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein	Overexpression causes abnormal biofilm architecture. After four hours of Zn(II) stress, HisJ protein levels decreased (Easton, 2006).	b2309
hisQ	None	histidine ABC transporter permease	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	Histidine ABC transporter permease	Null	b2308
kdpF	None	potassium ion accessory transporter subunit	Null	Inner membrane protein for high-affinity potassium transport	ArcA activates ybfA gene transcription and represses the divergently transcribed kdp operon by binding to the same operator site (Federowicz, 2014).	b4513
treB	None	trehalose-specific PTS enzyme: IIB and IIC component	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	Trehalose permease PTS EIIBC component	Null	b4240
lgt	umpA	phosphatidylglycerol-prolipoprotein diacylglyceryl transferase	Enzyme; Macromolecule synthesis, modification: Phospholipids	Phosphatidylglycerol:prolipoprotein diacylglycerol transferase	Null	b2828
uraA	None	uracil permease	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Nucleosides, purines, pyrimidines	Uracil permease; affects concentration dependence of pyr mutants	Null	b2497
hscA	hsc	DnaK-like molecular chaperone specific for IscU	Factor; Chaperones	DnaK-like chaperone Hsc66, IscU-specific chaperone HscAB; involved in FtsZ-ring formation	dnaK, hscA, hscC and yegD are paralogs. 13/121 HscA peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed (Maillet, 2007).	b2526
hscB	yfhE	HscA co-chaperone, J domain-containing protein Hsc56; IscU-specific chaperone HscAB	Factor; Chaperones	HscA co-chaperone, J domain-containing protein Hsc56; IscU-specific chaperone HscAB	5/40 peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this HscB start codon and indicate that the initial Met is not removed (Maillet, 2007).	b2527
iscA	yfhF	FeS cluster assembly protein	Putative regulator; Not classified	Recruit and deliver Fe for Fe-S cluster assembly in IscU; possibly an alternative scaffold for Fe-S cluster assembly	Either IscA or SufA are required for the proper assembly of 4Fe-4S clusters but not 2Fe-2S clusters (Tan, 2009). iscA, sufA, and erpA are paralogs; nfuA is a possible HT gene with an N-terminal domain homologous to sufA and an additional thioredoxin-like C-terminal domain.	b2528
ucpA	yfeF	furfural resistance protein, putative short-chain oxidoreductase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Furfural resistance, predicted oxidoreductase, COG1028 family	Null	b2426
rhtA	ybiF	threonine and homoserine efflux system	Putative membrane; Not classified	Transporter involved in threonine and homoserine efflux; overproduction confers resistance to elevated levels of exogenous L-threonine and L-homoserine	RhtA belongs to the EamA/RhaT transporter family, DMT superfamily.	b0813
ompX	ybiG	outer membrane protein X	Membrane; Outer membrane constituents	Outer membrane protein X; role in inducing RNAP-sigma E production	ompX is induced by acid or base. OmpX is regulated by cyaR sRNA (De Lay, 2009).	b0814
iceT	mdtD, yegB	putative citrate/iron-citrate/zinc-citrate efflux transporter	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative citrate/iron-citrate/zinc-citrate efflux transporter; putative arabinose exporter	Salmonella IceT(MdtD) has been characterized as a citrate and iron-citrate efflux transporter (Frawley, 2013). iceT(mdtD) mutants grow slower in the presence of zinc at high cell density and have a dramatically increased intracellular free zinc concentration after zinc shock, indicating that IceT may export zinc-citrate; the authors note that "it is likely that zinc is co-transported in a complex with other ligands that are substrates of MdtD" (Wang, 2013). Plasmid-mediated mdtABC-iceT(mdtD) overexpression confers resistance to deoxycholate and novobiocin in an acrAB mutant background but the same resistances are observed with mdtABC overexpression, indicating that iceT(mdtD) does not confer multidrug resistance (Nishino, 2001; Nagakubo, 2002). Chromosomal mdtABC-iceT(mdtD) expression induced by plasmid-mediated BaeR overproduction increases resistance to deoxycholate and novobiocin in an acrAB mutant; mutations in mdtB and mdtC but not iceT(mdtD) abolish this BaeR-induced resistance phenotype (Baranova, 2002). Consistent with arabinose export, an iceT(mdtD) mutant has increased intracellular arabinose, but not xylose; other compounds were not tested (Koita, 2012).	b2077
nlpE	cutF	lipoprotein involved with copper homeostasis and adhesion	Putative transport; Detoxification	Lipoprotein activating Cpx in response to adhesion; copper resistance; outer membrane protein	nlpE(cutF) mutations confer copper sensitivity and block cpxR induction by adhesion. NlpE overproduction also activates the Cpx response in the absence of adhesion. The first 20 aa of NlpE are a type II signal peptide.	b0192
yaeF	yaeK	putative lipoprotein	Null	Predicted lipoprotein, function unknown; Cys conserved	The first 20 aa of YaeF are predicted to be a type II signal peptide. COG0791: Cell wall-associated hydrolases. YebB, YaeF, YiiX are paralogs that are members of the NlpC superfamily (Anantharaman, 2003).	b0193
yfhG	qseG	putative outer membrane protein modulating the QseEF response	Phenotype; Not classified	Predicted OM protein possibly affecting the QseEF response	YfhG has been functionally characterized as an OM protein affecting the QseEF(GlrKR) response in the E. coli (EHEC) O157:H7 strain and renamed as QseG; EPEC QseG is transcriptionally activated by AI-3, epinephrine, and norepinephrine via QseC; EPEC QseG has been characterized as an autorepressor but does not contain known DNA-binding motifs (Reading, 2009). The first 25 aa of YfhG are predicted to be a signal peptide. Verified Tat substrate: YfhG(QseG) has a Tat/Sec (Class II) predicted 25 aa signal peptide (Tullman-Ercek, 2007). Although the YfhG(QseG) signal peptide has been shown to be capable of mediating Tat-dependent and Tat-independent translocation in a fusion reporter system (Tullman-Ercek, 2007), the twin arginines are not conserved. The predicted type II (lipoprotein) cleavage site may be a false positive prediction, although the protein family name for PF13942 is named as Lipoprotein_20 based on the lipoprotein prediction. The mature protein has an N-terminal Cys residue.	b2555
ydhB	None	LysR family putative transcriptional regulator	Putative regulator; Not classified	Function unknown, LysR family of transcriptional regulators	Null	b1659
ydhC	None	putative arabinose efflux transporter	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative arabinose efflux transporter	No overexpression resistances were found for YdhC. Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS).	b1660
sdaC	dcrA	putative serine transporter	Putative transport; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	L-serine:H+ symport permease, threonine-insensitive	HAAAP family. SdaC transcription is Crp activated.	b2796
napD	yojF	assembly protein for periplasmic nitrate reductase	Null	Twin-arginine signal-peptide-binding chaperone for NapA	Nap has a strong anti-transport actvity in vitro, but is essential for NapA activity and transport in vivo.	b2207
pgm	blu, pgmA	phosphoglucomutase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Phosphoglucomutase	Mutations in pgm affect chromosomal supercoiling. HT_Cmplx19_Cyt: PepD+Pgm+Zwf.	b0688
yhbJ	rapZ	adaptor protein for GlmZ/GlmY sRNA decay, glucosamine-6-phosphate-regulated; NTPase	Null	Adaptor protein RapZ for GlmZ/GlmY sRNA degradation; glucosamine-6-phosphate regulated; NTPase	YhbJ(RapZ) is an adaptor protein that recruits GlmZ to the catalytic domain of RNase E; GlmY is an anti-adaptor decoy sRNA that binds YhbJ(RapZ) competitively with GlmZ, protecting it from degradation (Göpel, 2013). Unprocessed GlmZ sRNA bound to Hfq upregulates GlmS by causing an activating mRNA cleavage; YhbJ(RapZ) mediates the negative feedback regulation of GlmS by sensing the GlmS product glucosamine-6-phosphate and facilitating GlmZ sRNA decay, which now cannot mediate GlmS mRNA cleavage activation by RNase E (Kalamorz, 2007). The rpoN operon contains rpoN-hpf-ptsN-yhbJ-npr. UPF0042 family. YhbJ binds ATP and GTP and is an NTPase (Luciano, 2009). 2/85 YhbJ peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is not removed (Maillet, 2007). The rap gene mnemonic is already in use for rapA.	b3205
npr	ptsO, rpoR, yhbK	phosphohistidinoprotein-hexose phosphotransferase component of N-regulated PTS system (Npr)	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Other	NPr, N-regulated HPr-like protein	The rpoN operon contains rpoN-hpf-ptsN-yhbJ-npr.	b3206
galP	Pgal	D-galactose transporter	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	D-galactose/H+ symporter	Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS). N-terminal Met is cleaved, as verified by mass spec.	b2943
asr	None	acid shock-inducible periplasmic protein	Phenotype; Not classified	Acid shock-inducible periplasmic protein required for acid tolerance; expression controlled by phoBR	Asr has a verified 21 aa type I signal peptide and is located in the periplasm; an additional 37 aa are processed off the N-terminus by an unknown protease, not DegP, to activate Asr as a mature 44 aa periplasmic protein; the asr translation start codon was confirmed by site-directed mutagenesis (Seputiene, 2003).	b1597
cobS	None	cobalamin synthase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Cobalamin	Cobalamin synthase	CobS is in a partial cobalamin biosynthesis pathway present in E. coli.	b1992
cobT	None	nicotinate-nucleotide--dimethylbenzimidazole phosphoribosyltransferase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Cobalamin	Nicotinate-nucleotide--dimethylbenzimidazole phosphoribosyltransferase; partial cobalamin biosynthesis pathway present in E. coli	Null	b1991
idnK	gntV	D-gluconate kinase, thermosensitive	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	D-gluconate kinase	Null	b4268
narU	yddF	nitrate/nitrite transporter	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Anions	Nitrate/nitrite transporter; nitrite extrusion protein 2	Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS).	b1469
sieB	git	phage superinfection exclusion protein, Rac prophage	Phenotype; Phage or Prophage Related	Superinfection exclusion protein, Rac prophage	sieB was identified in a personal communication of unpublished DNA sequence (2527 bp) and annotation from A.J. Clark, H. Samra, J. Li, C.C. Chu, C.S. Laufer and J.B. Hays, November, 1993; revised June, 1996.	b1353
kilR	kil, ydaD	killing protein, Rac prophage; FtsZ inhibitor protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Killing protein, Rac prophage; FtsZ inhibitor protein	Zygotic induction (transfer to a Rac- strain) of the Rac prophage causes cell death (Feinstein, 1982). Zygotic induction of the Rac prophage increases KilR expression which causes cell division arrest and altered cell morphology; these phenotypes can be suppressed by ftsZ overexpression (Conter, 1996).	b1352
ydaE	None	conserved protein, Rac prophage	Phage or Prophage Related	Metallothionein, function unknown, Rac prophage	Binds a single zinc ion via four cysteine residues. ydaE was identified in a personal communication of unpublished DNA sequence (2527 bp) and annotation from A.J. Clark, H. Samra, J. Li, C.C. Chu, C.S. Laufer and J.B. Hays, November, 1993; revised June, 1996. This sequence completed the chromosomal sequence of a partial, unpublished ydaE (orfF, Genbank M96749) found in a lambda phage derivative (Lambda reverse) that had picked up chromosomal DNA from the Qin(Kim) prophage.	b4526
ydaF	None	uncharacterized protein, Rac prophage	Phage or Prophage Related	DUF1391 family protein, Rac prophage	ydaF was identified in a personal communication of unpublished DNA sequence (2527 bp) and annotation from A.J. Clark, H. Samra, J. Li, C.C. Chu, C.S. Laufer and J.B. Hays, November, 1993; ydaF ORF identified, A.J. Clark, February, 2004. DNA sequence revised( 2527 bp), June, 1996. ydaF(Rac) and ydfA(Qin) are homologous.	b4527
rdgC	yaiD	nucleoid-associated ssDNA and dsDNA binding protein; competitive inhibitor of RecA function	Null	Competitive inhibitor of RecA function; nucleoid-associated ssDNA and dsDNA binding protein; synthetic lethal with priA	Growth in recBC sbcBC rdgC strains is dependent on recombination proteins.	b0393
yaiE	None	UPF0345 family protein	Null	Function unknown, UPF0345 family	Null	b0391
eaeH'	None	pseudogene, attaching and effacing protein homology	Factor; Not classified	Pseudogene, intimin homolog; N-terminal fragment, interrupted/deleted by IS3A	Full length 1417 aa EaeH protein from E. coli O157:H7 is Z0375.	b0297
gatR'	None	pseudogene, repressor for gat operon	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction, repressor for gat operon; interrupted by IS3E	IS3E inserted at codon 100 and made a 3 bp target site duplication GTC. Intact version present in other strains, including E. coli 06 (NCBI gi 26108868). ATG at codon -2 is not conserved.	b4498
rsmB	fmu, fmv, rrmB, sun, yhdB	16S rRNA m(5)C967 methyltransferase, SAM-dependent	Enzyme; rRNA modification	16S rRNA m(5)C967 methyltransferase, SAM-dependent	Null	b3289
ytjC	gpmB	phosphatase	Enzyme; Not classified	Phosphatase, function unknown; multicopy suppressor of serB	ytjC is a multicopy suppressor of a serB mutation lacking phosphoserine phosphatase (Patrick, 2007). Although its natural substrate(s) is unknown, purified YtjC(GpmB) has phosphatase activity against the model substrates para-nitrophenyl phosphate and 6-phospho-benzisoxazole (Khersonsky, 2011). GpmB/PhoE/CobC family proteins (COG0406) are sometimes misannotated as predicted phosphoglycerate mutases instead of predicted phosphatases; B. subtilus PhoE (a broad-specificity phosphatase) and S. typhimurium CobC (ribazole-5'-phosphate phosphatase) are COG0406 members with known activities (O'Toole, 1994; Ridgen, 2001). YjtC(GpmB) is not a phosphoglycerate mutase. YtjC(GpmB) is a member of the histidine phosphatase superfamily, represented by the InterPro superfamily profile IPR013078 and CDD cl11399 (also called the dPGM superfamily) including phosphatases and fructose 2,6-bisphosphatases as well as factor-dependent phosphoglycerate mutases; the histidine phosphatase superfamily is characterized by a conserved histidine that is transiently phosphorylated during the catalytic cycle (Fothergill-Gilmore, 1989; Fothergill-Gilmore, 1990; Jedrzejas, 2000; Johnsen, 2007; Rigden, 2008; Foster, 2010). His9 of YtjC is predicted to be the transient phosphohistidine by homology. C10/130 YtjC(GpmB) peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is not removed (Maillet, 2007).	b4395
mukF	kicB	chromosome condensin MukBEF, kleisin-like subunit, binds calcium	Factor; Cell killing	Chromosome condensin MukBEF, kleisin-like subunit, binds calcium	Condensin is required for chromosome partitioning and compaction. Null mutants die above 30C and produce some anucleate cells at permissive temperatures. 2/30 MukF peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed (Maillet, 2007).	b0922
elyC	ycbC	envelope biogenesis factor; DUF218 superfamily protein	Factor; Murein sacculus, peptidoglycan	Envelope biogenesis factor; DUF218 superfamily protein	ElyC may be involved in the competition between the PG and ECA synthetic pathways for the lipid carrier undecaprenyl pyrophosphate; elyC(ycbC) mutants are cold-sensitive (CS) for growth due to cell lysis; ; ispU(uppS), murA, and mrcB are multi-copy suppressors of elyC; rmlA-elyC and wecF-elyC are synthetic lethal double mutant pairs presumably due to the accumulation of ECA precursors since an early pathway block imposed by a third mutation in the wecA gene suppresses both synthetic lethal phenoytpes; ydcF and elyC(ycbC) (COG1434) and sanA and ygjQ (COG2949) are four members of the DUF218 superfamily (PF02698), but only elyC complemennt the CS phenotype (Paradis-Bleau, 2014).	b0920
smtA	ycbD	putative S-adenosyl-L-methionine-dependent methyltransferase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	Putative methyltransferase, SAM-dependent, Hns-regulated	Null	b0921
brnQ	hrbA	branched-chain amino acid transport system 2 carrier protein; LIV-II transport system for Ile, Leu, and Val	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	Branched-chain amino acid transport system 2 carrier protein; LIV-II transport system for Ile, Leu, and Val; mutants are valine and o-methylthreonine resistant, glycylvaline sensitive	Null	b0401
ccmD	yojM	cytochrome c biogenesis protein; heme export ABC transporter holo-CcmE release factor	Transport; Protein, peptide secretion	Heme export ABC transporter holo-CcmE release factor	Overexpression causes abnormal biofilm architecture. CcmD is required for the release of holo-CcmE from the CcmABCD complex; CcmD spans the inner membrane once and is part the CcmABCD transporter: C-in, N-out (Richard-Fogal, 2008).	b2198
yjjI	yjjH	DUF3029 family protein, putative glycine radical enzyme	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Anaerobically-induced glycine radical superfamily enzyme; required for anaerobic growth	A yjjI mutant grows slowly on glucose anaerobically and does not grow on glycerol and nitrate anaerobically (Kang, 2005). yjjI is induced 5-fold during anaerobic growth in minimal glucose medium and yjjI induction is FNR-dependent, however yjjI does not appear to have an FNR box (Covert, 2004; Kang, 2005). YjjI and ortholog H. influenzae HI0521 were reported to be PflB homologs (Kolker, 2004). yjjI is in an operon with yjjW, which encodes a PflA-like radical SAM activase homolog that may bind and activate YjjI. YjjI is 40% identical to HI0521 (UniProt P44744) which matches a PFL family profile (Pfam PF02901). YjjI belongs to a superfamily of PFL-like glycine radical enzymes (NCBI cd00576; Superfamily SSF51998).	b4380
hinT	ycfF	purine nucleoside phosphoramidase, dadA activator protein	Null	Activator of DadA, D-alanine catabolism; purine nucleoside phosphoramidase; aminoacyl-adenylate hydrolase	A hinT mutant cannot catabolize D-alanine due to a defect in DadA dehydrogenase preventing D-alanine utilization; the role of HinT is post-transcriptional and requires both the enzymatic activity and the C-terminal domain (Bardaweel, 2011). HinT hydrolyzes lysyl-AMP, an activity that may be involved in the regulation of translation or the scavanging of aminoacyl-adenylates (Chou, 2006). hinT is essential for growth under high salt conditions (Chou, 2005). HinT is a member of the HIT (histidine triad) family that contains Ap3A and Ap4A hydrolases. HinT is a low abundance protein.	b1103
gspM	hopZ, pshM	general secretory pathway component, cryptic	Putative transport; Not classified	Part of H-NS-silenced gsp-alpha (T2SS-alpha) divergon, type II protein secretion; cloned gsp-alpha (T2SS-alpha) divergon secretes ChiA, requires gspAB operon	A divergon is a regulon comprised of two adjacent divergent operons or genes.	b3334
ydaG	gatA	UBA-like domain protein, Rac prophage	Phage or Prophage Related	UBA-like domain protein, Rac prophage; expressed small protein	YdaG is expressed in exponential and stationary phase growth (Hemm, 2008). YdaG matches Pfam PF14555 (UBA_4) and the InterPro IPR009060 (UBA-like) profile (which is derived from the Superfamily SSF46934 profile) indicating that YdaG consists of a single UBA-like domain; UBA is a ubiquitin associated domain that is often involved in binding ubiquitin; the UBA, UBA-like, and RuvA C-terminal domain all belong to the UBA-like Pfam clan CL0214. ydaG was identified in a personal communication of unpublished DNA sequence (2527 bp) and annotation from A.J. Clark, H. Samra, J. Li, C.C. Chu, C.S. Laufer and J.B. Hays, November, 1993. DNA sequence revised (2527 bp), June, 1996.	b1355
yjdC	cutA3	putative transcriptional regulator	Null	Putative transcriptional repressor, function unknown	TetR family.	b4135
cutA	cutA1, cycY	divalent-cation tolerance protein, copper sensitivity	Phenotype; Adaptations, atypical conditions	Copper sensitivity, binds Cu(II); possible role in cytochrome c maturation; trimeric	Null	b4137
dsbD	cutA2, cycZ, dipZ, htrI	thiol:disulfide interchange protein and activator of DsbC	Putative enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Sulfur metabolism	Transmembrane protein-disulfide reductase, transfers electrons from cytoplasmic thioredoxin to the periplasm	DsbD is required for the formation of disulfide bonds in some periplasmic proteins and for the assembly of C-type cytochromes in the periplasm.	b4136
cspE	gicA, msmC	constitutive cold shock family transcription antitermination protein; negative regulator of cspA transcription; RNA melting protein; ssDNA-binding protein	Phenotype; Not classified	Transcription antitermination protein; constitutively-expressed cold shock family protein; negative regulator of cspA transcription; binds and melts RNA; binds ssDNA; dimeric	The cspABEG deletion BX04 is cold-sensitive and forms filaments at 15C (Xia, 2001). CspE is a cold shock protein homolog, but is constitutively expressed at 37C. CspE has transcription antitermination activity (Bae, 2000). CspE affects rpoS and uspA expression. CspE is a negative regulator of cspA transcription. A cspE-flc(crcB) double mutant confers camphor-hypersensitivity and exacerbates the phenotypes of topo IV and MukB mutants, indicating that CspE and Flc(CrcB) may have a (possibly redundant) role in maintaining condensed chromosomes, either direct or indirect, possibly through the regulation of other gene products (Sand, 2003). CspE dimers bind ssDNA containing six or more contiguous dT residues with high affinity; CspE dimers binding two distant chromosome regions possible explains a condensin role for cspE when overexpressed with pagP(crcA) and flc(crcB) to suppress mukB mutations and confer camphor resistance (Hu, 1996; Johnston, 2006). Multicopy expression of cspE alone confers 10-fold camphor-resistance, a cspE-flc(crcB) clone confers 100-fold resistance, and the cspE-pagP-crcB clone confers 1000-fold resistance (single flc(crcB) or pagP clones had no effect); it is not known if the pagP gene product is contributing or if the three gene clone just expresses more flc(crcB) and/or cspE (Sand, 2003). A cspE-pagP-flc(crcB) clone increases plasmid DNA supercoiling and reduces DNA gyrase and topoisomerase IV mutant phenotypes (Sand, 2003). The cspE gene was also identified as a "negative regulator of growth in the cold", named as gicA, and submitted to Genbank (L29054) (Ramanathan Y., Narayanarao A.V.S.S., Mathur M., Mahajan S.K., Thesis (1994), University of Bombay, India). otherPDB (S. typhimurium): 3I2Z.	b0623
pagP	crcA, ybeG	phospholipid:lipid A palmitoyltransferase	Enzyme; Surface polysaccharides & antigens	Phospholipid:lipid A palmitoyltransferase; confers resistance to cationic antimicrobial peptides; multicopy suppressor of camphor-induced or mukB mutant chromosome condensation	PagP(CrcA) transfers a palmitate residue from the sn-1 position of a phospholipid to the N-linked hydroxymyristate on the proximal unit of lipid A (or its precursors). A cspE-flc(crcB) double mutant confers camphor-sensitivity and exacerbates the phenotypes of topo IV and MukB mutants (Sand, 2003). A cspE-pagP-flc(crcB) clone compensates for a loss of the normal condensin MukBEF and recondenses chromosomes decondensed by camphor treatment (Hu, 1996; Sand, 2003). A cspE-pagP-flc(crcB) clone increases plasmid DNA supercoiling and reduces DNA gyrase and topoisomerase IV mutant phenotypes (Sand, 2003). The phoP-activation phenotype was initially characterized in Salmonella then confirmed in E. coli (Jia, 2004). SignalP-NN incorrectly predicts a 27 aa signal peptide, but the verified cleavage site after 25 aa is predicted as a second possible cleavage site by SignalP-NN and as the only cleavage site by the more recent SignalP-HMM predictor (see SignalP button below). Mg(2+) stimulon-PhoPQ regulon, EvgAS-PhoPQ cascade enhanced-expression subset.	b0622
grxD	ydhD	glutaredoxin-4	Null	Monothiol glutaredoxin Grx4 with CGFS motif; substrate for thioredoxin reductase; mutants are hypersensitive to iron depletion	grxD mutations are synthetic lethal with mutations in the isc operon, suggesting that Grx4 is involved in an alternative FeS cluster assembly pathway; a similar synthetic lethality pattern was observed for the bolA-like gene ibaG(yrbA), but not for bolA (Butland, 2005; Yeung, 2011). Homodimeric monothiol glutaredoxin Grx4 binds FeS and can efficiently transfer FeS clusters to Fdx in vitro (Yeung, 2011). BolA can form a heterodimer in vitro with FeS-bound monothiol glutaredoxin Grx4 but this complex is much less efficient than the FeS-bound Grx4 homodimer in FeS cluster transfer to Fdx (Yeung, 2011). Grx4 is a highly abundant protein with ppGpp-dependent induction during stationary phase or iron depletion (Fernandes, 2005). Not a substrate for glutathione reductase. Although a deletion for grxD is in the Keio collection, it was also reported that grxD is an essential gene that could not be inactivated (Gerdes, 2003; Fernandes, 2005; Baba, 2006). grxD, but not bolA or ibaG(yrbA) mutants are hypersensitive to iron depletion (Yeung, 2011).	b1654
yajG	None	putative lipoprotein	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Probable lipoprotein, function unknown; Cys conserved	The first 17 aa of YajG are predicted to be a type II signal peptide. HT_Cmplx43_Mem: DcrB+MoaB+OsmE+Slp+YajG+YraP.	b0434
ampG	None	muropeptide transporter	Regulator; Drug/analog sensitivity	Muropeptide permease, imports GlcNAc-anhMurNAc-peptides; required for cloned Citrobacter freundii AmpR-regulated beta-lactamase induction and murein recycling	Imported muropeptides must contain the disaccharide GlcNAc-anhMurNAc, which is also efficiently transported without attached peptides. Mutants accumulate GlcNAc-anhMurNAc-tripeptide. Transport inhibited by CCCP. 14 TM helices are [predicted, but fusion studies indicate that predicted hydrophobic helices 5, 6, 11, and 12 are in cytoplasmic loops; AmpG probably has 10 TM helices with N-in, C-in topology. AmpG has been studied using cloned Citrobacter freundii ampR and ampC genes, which are normally on the chromosome of C. freundii. This C. freundii ampC is not the same as the E. coli weak constitutive chromosomal ampC beta-lactamase; E. coli has no ampR gene. Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS).	b0433
nudF	adpP, aspP, rdsA, trgB(R.s.), yqiE, yzzG	ADP-ribose pyrophosphatase	Null	ADP-sugar pyrophosphatase; sole ADP-glucose hydrolase, activity limits glycogen production; one of several ADP-ribose hydrolases; creBC regulon; non-essential	Null	b3034
yqiB	yzzH	DUF1249 protein YqiB	Null	DUF1249 family protein, function unknown	YqiB is noted as a putative enzyme related to dehydrogenases in some databases but this could not be confirmed.	b3033
yqiA	yzzI	acyl CoA esterase	Null	Acyl CoA esterase in vitro, physiological function unknown	Null	b3031
cpdA	icc	3',5' cAMP phosphodiesterase	Regulator; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	3',5' cAMP phosphodiesterase; mutants have elevated cAMP levels	CpdA is defective in Crooke's strain (ATCC 8739).	b3032
ptsP	ygdF, ygdO	PEP-protein phosphotransferase enzyme I; GAF domain containing protein	Enzyme; Transport of small molecules: Other	PTS PEP-protein phosphotransferase Enzyme I (Ntr)	Null	b2829
hemF	popB, sec	coproporphyrinogen III oxidase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Heme, porphyrin	Coproporphyrinogen III oxidase, oxygen-dependent; stimulated by manganese; dimeric	Null	b2436
eutR	yfeG	eut operon transcriptional activator, AraC family	Regulator; Not classified	eut operon transcriptional activator, AraC family; concerted induction requires both B12 and ethanolamine; autoregulatory	The eut operon has been characterized in Salmonella. In Salmonella, overproduction of EutR allows for partial induction by either inducer alone.	b2437
glnK	ybaI	nitrogen assimilation regulatory protein for GlnL, GlnE, and AmtB	Regulator; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	Potent activator of NRII(GlnL/NtrB) phosphatase; trimeric; regulated through NRI/NRII two-component regulatory system; binds to membrane when inhibiting AmtB	glnK is a glnB paralog. Like GlnB, the GlnK protein is a member of the trimeric PII signal transduction protein family. In nitrogen limitation it is subject to post-translational modification by uridylylation (mediated by GlnD) of Tyr51 in the T-loop of each subunit. This modification is reversed in N-sufficient conditions. In ammonium sufficient conditions non-uridylylated GlnK forms a 1:1 complex with the ammonia channel protein AmtB and prevents ammonium uptake through AmtB. Complex formation is reversed by ammonium starvation. [Comment provided by EcoTeam member Mike Merrick, 11.16.06]	b0450
nadK	yfjB, yfjE	NAD kinase	Null	ATP-NAD kinase	nadK is probably an essential gene since mutants could not be obtained. Polyphosphates do not serve as P donors. yfjB is renamed as nadK, personal comm., Kousaku Murata, Kyoto Univ., 11/02.	b2615
cbpA	None	DnaK co-chaperone; curved DNA-binding protein	Factor; Chaperones	DnaK co-chaperone, binds curved DNA	DnaJ homolog. HT_Cmplx34_Cyt: ArgD+CbpA+PepT. DjlA, CbpA, and DnaJ are all DNA-binding proteins, with the membrane bound cytosolic protein DjlA having high affinity for DNA (Gur, 2005).	b1000
cbpM	yccD	modulator of CbpA co-chaperone	Null	Modulator of CbpA co-chaperone activity	cbpM is in the CueR regulon (Marbach, 2012).	b0999
torD	None	TorA-maturation chaperone	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Redox enzyme maturation protein (REMP) for TorA; cytoplasmic chaperone for TorA activation; GTPase; protects TorA TAT signal peptide from degradation	TorD prepares the molybdoenzyme TorA for MGD cofactor insertion, independent of signal peptide binding. torD, dmsD and ycdY are paralogs. Overexpressed YdcY and DmsD interfere with apoTorA maturation by TorD, independent of the TorA signal peptide (Ilbert, 2004). Bifunctional TorD acts in MGD insertion and TorA export proof-reading, a step that insures only mature protein is exported. TorD has intrinsic GTPase activity in its domain-swapped homodimeric form (Guymer, 2010).	b0998
yccE	None	PRK09784 family protein	Null	PRK09784 family protein	Null	b1001
seqA	hsm-1	negative modulator of initiation of replication	Regulator; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	Multi-faceted genome stability factor; negative modulator of initiation of replication; replication fork tracking protein required for chromosome segregation; chromosome cohesion protein; hemimethylated GATC binding protein	SeqA, a multi-faceted genome stability factor, is a positive regulator of chromosome cohesion, probably mediated by antagonizing ParCE-mediated sister chromosome resolution and possibly by direct bridging; SeqA-dependent cohesion is required for proper chromosome segregation (Joshi, 2013). SeqA sequesters newly replicated hemimethylated oriC origins to prevent re-initiation. SeqA is required for the membrane binding of hemimethylated oriC in vitro. SeqA may facilitate cII binding to phage lambda promoters, enhancing transcription. The SeqA self-association function is in the N-terminal domain. DNA-binding activity is in C-terminal domain. SeqA expression is negatively modulated by HU. SeqA is a homotetramer. aphA(hobH) mutants overproduce SeqA.	b0687
chbG	celG, ydjC	chito-oligosaccharide deacetylase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: N,N'-diacetylchitobiose	Chito-oligosaccharide deacetylase	ChbG is a chitobiose and chitotriose deacetylase with a role in both regulation and catabolism of chito-oligosaccharides (Verma, 2012). ChbG(YdjC) has promiscuous phosphonoesterase activity against a xenobiotic phosphorylated phosphonate (Kheronsky, 2011). chbG(ydjC) is a gene in the chb chitobiose catabolism operon. ChbG(YdjC) is a member of the InterPro IPR002509 polysaccharide deacetylase superfamily including yeast chitin deacetylase. The chb operon is induced by N,N'-diacetylchitobiose. The chb operon was previously thought to encode a cryptic cel operon for a cellobiose degradation system. The Cel+ phenotype is due to mutations making expression chitobiose-independent, but a fully induced operon did not support growth on cellobiose, implying a mutation altering the substrate specificity is needed; several candidate mutations were noted in Genbank, but not proven to alter the specificity of the system (Keyhani, 1997). In contrast, a later study claim that mutations making the operon expression high-level constitutive by chbR and nagC mutations are sufficient for the Cel+ phenotype and that no mutations altering substrate specificity are required (Kachroo, 2007). UPF0249 family.	b1733
yegD	None	Hsp70 chaperone family protein	Putative regulator; Not classified	Putatitve DnaK-like chaperone, function unknown	Null	b2069
ygaC	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Function unknown; Fur regulon	Null	b2671
treR	None	trehalose 6-phosphate-inducible trehalose regulon transcriptional repressor	Regulator; Osmotic adaptation	Repressor of trehalose regulon; trehalose 6-phosphate-inducible	Null	b4241
cspB	None	Qin prophage; cold shock protein	Phenotype; Adaptations, atypical conditions; Phage or Prophage Related	Cold shock protein, Qin prophage; cold shock inducible	The cspABEG deletion BX04 is cold-sensitive and forms filaments at 15C (Xia, 2001).	b1557
cspC	msmB	stress protein, member of the CspA-family	Phenotype; Not classified	Multicopy suppressor of mukB; cold shock protein homolog constitutively expressed at 37C; antitermination protein; affects rpoS and uspA expression	CspC is a transcription antiterminator (Bae, 2000). HT_Cmplx32_Mem: CspC+Hns+HupA.	b1823
cspF	None	Qin prophage; cold shock protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Cold shock protein homolog, Qin prophage; not cold-inducible	Null	b1558
rlmA	rrmA, yebH	23S rRNA m(1)G745 methyltransferase, SAM-dependent	Enzyme; rRNA modification	23S rRNA m(1)G745 methyltransferase, SAM-dependent; mutant has slow growth rate, slow chain elongation rate, and viomycin resistance	2/21 RlmA(RrmA,YebH) peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed (Maillet, 2007).	b1822
flc	crcB, fluC, ybeI	fluoride efflux channel, dual topology membrane protein	Null	Fluoride efflux channel, dual topology membrane protein; Fluc protein	An E. coli K-12 flc(crcB) deletion confers hypersensitivity to NaF, consistent with Flc(CrcB) being a fluoride ion efflux channel; the camphor sensitivity phenotype of an flc(crcB) mutant may be due to contaminating NaF in camphor (Baker, 2012; Stockbridge, 2012). The E. coli K-12 Flc(CrcB) protein is a dual-topopogy membrane protein (Rapp, 2006). A Flc(CrcB) family protein from an E. coli virulence plasmid has been shown to be a homodimeric inner membrane fluoride-specific efflux channel; the membrane topologies of Flc(CrcB) family members from B. pertussis and L. acidophilus have four transmembrane helices and the Flc(CrcB) subunits have opposite orientation topologies; the CrcB family of fluoride export channels has been renamed as the Fluc family (Stockbridge, 2013). There is already a flu gene in E. coli so crcB has been renamed as flc instead of fluC, which is retained as a synonym. E. coli K-12 Flc(CrcB) is an inner membrabe proteono with four predicted transmembrane helicies (Daley, 2005). A cspE-pagP-flc(crcB) clone compensates for a loss of the normal condensin MukBEF and recondenses chromosomes decondensed by camphor treatment (Hu, 1996; Sand, 2003). A cspE-pagP-flc(crcB) clone increases plasmid DNA supercoiling and reduces DNA gyrase and topoisomerase IV mutant phenotypes (Sand, 2003). A cspE-flc(crcB) double mutant confers camphor-hypersensitivity and exacerbates the phenotypes of topo IV and MukB mutants, indicating that CspE and Flc(CrcB) may have roles in maintaining condensed chromosomes, either direct or indirect, possibly through the regulation of other gene products (Sand, 2003). Multicopy expression of cspE alone confers 10-fold camphor-resistance, a cspE-flc(crcB) clone confers 100-fold resistance, and the cspE-pagP-flc(crcB) clone confers 1000-fold resistance (single flc(crcB) or pagP clones had no effect); it is not known if the pagP gene product is contributing or if the three gene clone just expresses more flc(crcB) and/or cspE (Sand, 2003).	b0624
waaF	rfaF	ADP-heptose:LPS heptosyltransferase II	Enzyme; Macromolecule metabolism: Lipopolysaccharide	ADP-heptose:LPS heptosyltransferase II	Null	b3620
panM	livL, panZ, yhhK	PanD autocleavage accelerator, panothenate synthesis	Factor; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Pantothenate	PanD autocleavage accelerator, panothenate auxotrophy	A deletion strain lacking livJ, livL(panM) and livK requires pantothenate for growth and this requirement is complemented by livL(panM) alone (Adams, 1990). Monomeric PanM binds to tetrameric PanD and accelerates PanD self-activation by autocleavage at Ser25 in vivo and in vitro; plasmid overexpression of panD overcomes the pantothentate requirement of panM mutants; PanM(YhhK) was initially characterized in Salmonella and subsequently characterized in E. coli where it was named PanZ (Stuecker, 2012a; Stuecker, 2012b; Nozaki, 2012). In EcoGene, panM is used as the primary gene name (gene symbol) and panZ is a synonym (alternate gene symbol) so that E. coli and Salmonella orthologs will have the same gene name when possible, continuing a genetic map tradition (Bachmann, 1990; Rudd, 2000). In Salmonella, and presuambly E. coli, PanM is a degenerate GNAT family homolog that lacks acetyltransferase activity due to a missing catalytic glutamate; PanM retains the ability to bind acetyl-CoA, which is required for its PanD co-activator function (Stuecker, 2012a; Stuecker, 2012b). PanM is the first functionally characterized member of the GNAT aceytyltransferase-related Pfam PF12568 (DUF3749) family (Finn, 2014).	b3459
yhhL	None	DUF1145 family protein	Null	DUF1145 family protein	Null	b3466
yhhM	None	DUF2500 family protein	Putative factor; Not classified	DUF2500 family protein	Null	b3467
yhhN	None	TMEM86 family putative inner membrane protein	Putative enzyme; Not classified	TMEM86 family predicted inner membrane protein	Null	b3468
zntA	yhhO	zinc, cobalt and lead efflux system	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Cations	Zn(II), Cd(II), and Pb(II) translocating P-type ATPase; mutant is hypersensitive to Zn and Cd salts	ZntA belongs to the HAD superfamily; ZntA contains a putative phosphatase HAD domain at residues 430-649. The crystal structures of ZntA from the E. coli strain Shigella sonnei differs from K-12 ZntA at 7/732 residues (Wang, 2014).	b3469
tusA	sirA, yhhP	mnm(5)-s(2)U34-tRNA 2-thiolation sulfurtransferase	Null	Sulfurtransferase, 2-thiolation of mnm(5)s(2)U34-tRNA; motility defect; affects RpoS stability; growth defects suppressed by multicopy ftsZ or dksA	TusA interacts with and activates IscS, accepting sulfur from IscS to form C19 persulfide; transfers C19 persulfide to C78 of TusD. A tusA(yhhP) mutation was reported to grow very poorly and form filaments in rich media due to disruption of ftsZ ring (Yamashino, 1998). tusA, yedF and yeeD are paralogs.	b3470
yhhQ	None	DUF165 family inner membrane protein	Null	DUF165 family inner membrane protein	yhhQ has a predicted PurR box.	b3471
dcrB	yhhR	putative lipoprotein	Null	Probable lipoprotein required for phage C1 adsorption; periplasmic; Cys conserved	The first 19 aa of DcrB are predicted to be a type II signal peptide. Predicted to be anchored to the inner membrane. HT_Cmplx43_Mem: DcrB+MoaB+OsmE+Slp+YajG+YraP.	b3472
yhhS	None	putative arabinose efflux transporter	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative arabinose efflux transporter	YhhS may be an arabinose efflux transporter because a yhhS mutant has increased intracellular arabinose, but not xylose; other compounds were not tested (Koita, 2012). Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS).	b3473
yhhT	None	UPF0118 family putative transporter	Null	UPF0118 family membrane predicted permease	Null	b3474
acpT	yhhU	4'-phosphopantetheinyl transferase	Null	4'-phosphopantetheinyl transferase; CoA-phosphopantetheinyltransferase; multicopy suppressor of acpS1, can modify ACP when overexpressed	AcpT is related to the Sfp COG2091 branch of the phosphopantetheinyl transferase superfamily; its putative native apo-protein substrate is unknown. A nonsense mutation making a truncated YejM causes increased outer membrane permeability, TS growth, and reduced lipid A synthesis; these phenotypes, and the lethality of a null mutation, are suppressible by a multicopy acpT clone (Hirvas, 1997; De Lay, 2008).	b3475
rbbA	yhiG, yhiH	ribosome-associated ATPase: ATP-binding protein/ATP-binding membrane protein	Putative transport; Not classified	Ribosome-associated ATPase, required for protein synthesis; Protein W; binds protein S1	RbbA is homologous to ABC transporter fusion proteins, with an N-terminal tandem ATP-binding COG1123 domain with two COG1131 ATPase hits, and a C-terminal ABC-like transporter permease domain (COG0842, pfam01061/ABC2_membrane), but no overexpression resistance phenotype has been detected and it does not appear to be a membrane transporter. RbbA is homologous to fungi-specific translation elongation factor 3 (EF-3). Hygromycin B inhibits RbbA ATPase and releases RbbA from ribosomes. A truncated N-terminal 47 kDa form of RbbA (the tandem ATPase domain) was previously isolated and characterized as Protein W (Kiel, 1999). YadH, YbhR, YbhS, YhhJ, and the RbbA C-terminal domain are paralogous ABC2-membrane permease family members (pfam01061/COG0842). The yhiI-rbbA-yhhJ operon also encodes YhiI, a membrane fusion efflux protein (MFP) homolog, and the YhhJ ABC transporter permease homolog that is paralogous to the RbbA C-terminal permease domain. The associations or roles, if any, that YhiI and YhhJ might have in RbbA function is unknown, but it is possible that YhiI-RbbA-YhhJ is or was an exporter. RbbA and YhjD interact (Babu, 2011). The yhiI-rbbA-yhhJ operon promoter region binds ArcA and ArcA activates yhiI-rbbA-yhhJ operon expression (Federowicz, 2014).	b3486
yhiI	None	putative membrane fusion protein (MFP) of efflux pump	Putative membrane; Not classified	Predicted membrane fusion protein (MFP) of efflux pump; function unknown; signal anchor	The yhiI-rbbA-yhhJ operon also encodes RbbA, an ABC transporter ATPase/permease fusion protein homolog that does not appear to be a transporter but rather is a ribosome-associated ATPase, and the YhhJ ABC transporter permease that is paralogous to the RbbA C-terminal permease domain. The associations or roles, if any, that YhiI and YhhJ might have in RbbA function is unknown, but it is possible that YhiI-RbbA-YhhJ is or was an exporter. The YhiI MFP was mistakenly predicted to be a periplasmic binding protein (noted as subfamily "v"), leading to the mis-classification of RbbA(YhiGH)-YhhJ-YhiI as a putative importer (Linton, 1998). Overexpression causes abnormal biofilm architecture. YhiI has a predicted 23 aa signal anchor. The yhiI-rbbA-yhhJ operon promoter region binds ArcA and ArcA activates yhiI-rbbA-yhhJ operon expression (Federowicz, 2014).	b3487
yhiJ	None	DUF4049 family protein	Null	DUF4049 family protein, function unknown	YhiL' and YhiJ are paralogs.	b3488
yhiL'	yhiK	pseudogene, DUF4049 family protein	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction, DUF4049 family protein; FliA regulated	An apparent frameshift mutation at codon 399 has been reconstructed with an X, which likely was a Lys(K) codon in the original sequence. An intact version of YhiL is present in E. coli O157:H7 as Z4888. The yhiL gene can be transcribed in vitro with sigma28 (FliA) holoenzyme (Yu, 2006).	b4660
yhiM	None	acid resistance protein, inner membrane	Null	Acid resistance inner membrane protein	A yhiM mutant does not survive low pH and has defective RpoS, glutamine and lysine-dependent acid resistance pathways (Nguyen, 2012). yhiM is in the GadE regulon (Marbach, 2012). DUF1323 family. Upregulated in acidic conditions. EvgAS regulon. Repressed during biofilm formation.	b3491
yhiN	None	putative oxidoreductase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Predicted oxidoreductase, function unknown	Null	b3492
pitA	pit	phosphate transporter, low-affinity; tellurite importer	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Anions	Low-affinity inorganic phosphate transporter; tellurite uptake; arsenate transporter; putative Zn(II) transporter	PitA is a tellurite importer (Elías, 2012). PitA is a phosphate:H+ symporter and can also accumulate arsenate (Rosenberg, 1977). pitA mutants are resistant to Zn(II) and accumulate reduced amount of zinc (Beard, 2000).	b3493
uspB	yhiO	universal stress (ethanol tolerance) protein B	Null	Universal stress protein B, confers ethanol resistance in stationary phase; sigma S-regulated gene divergent from uspA	The uspA-uspB divergent operon promoter region binds FNR and uspB expression is repressed by FNR (Federowicz, 2014).	b3494
dtpB	yhiP	dipeptide and tripeptide permease B	Transport; Not classified	Dipeptide and tripeptide permease B	Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS).	b3496
rsmJ	yhiQ	16S rRNA m(2)G1516 methyltransferase, SAM-dependent	Enzyme; rRNA modification	16S rRNA m(2)G1516 methyltransferase, SAM-dependent	rsmJ is the second gene in prlC operon and is in the heat shock regulon.	b3497
rlmJ	yhiR	23S rRNA m(6)A2030 methyltransferase, SAM-dependent	Enzyme; rRNA modification	23S rRNA m(6)A2030 methyltransferase, SAM-dependent	RlmJ(YhiR) is an H. influenzae competence protein ComJ homolog that has been reported to be required for the utilization of DNA as a carbon source (Palchevskiy, 2006).	b3499
arsR	arsE	arsenical resistance operon transcriptional repressor; autorepressor	Regulator; Drug/analog sensitivity	Arsenate resistance operon repressor; resistance to arsenate, arsenite, and antimonite	Null	b3501
arsB	arsF	arsenite/antimonite transporter	Transport; Drug/analog sensitivity	Arsenite pump, inner membrane; resistance to arsenate, arsenite, and antimonite	ArsB can function alone using PMF to drive transport, as is the case with the chromosomal ArsB, which lacks the ArsA ATPase; ArsB proteins can use ATP to drive efflux if ArsA is present. The chromosomal ArsB is listed in TCDB as one of two 3.4.A.1.1 proteins; the TC 3.4.A.1.1 ArsA protein is plasmid-derived. The correct TC class for the stand-alone E. coli chromsomal ArsB is 2.A.45 and the ArsB protein should probably be re-classified as TC 2.A.45.1.2. IT (Ion Transporter) superfamily (Prakash, 2003). ST(3) structural class based on hydropathy profile (Lolkema, 2003).	b3502
arsC	arsG	arsenate reductase	Enzyme; Drug/analog sensitivity	Arsenate reductase; resistance to arsenate, arsenite, and antimonite	ArsC reduces arsenate to arsenite so it can be extruded through ArsB.	b3503
yhiS'	None	pseudogene	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction, interrupted by IS5T	IS5T inserted at codon 249 and made a 4 bp target site duplication TTAG. E. coli O157:H7 YhiS (Z4907) has no IS5 and has a frameshift near the C-terminus relative to K-12. the S. flexneri version (SF3539) has a similar C-terminus to the K-12 version. YhiS may have a novel fold without detectable homologs.	b3504
mdtE	yhiU	anaerobic multidrug efflux transporter, ArcA-regulated	Putative membrane; Not classified	Anaerobic multidrug efflux transporter MdtEF-TolC; toxic nitrosated indole efflux; membrane fusion protein (MFP) component, lipoprotein 	When expressed from a multi-copy plasmid mdtEF confers multidrug resistance to a variety of compounds including rhodamine, erythromycin, deoxycholate, benzalkonium, doxorubicin, EtBr, SDS, and crystal violet (Nishino, 2001). mdtEF mutant cells exhibit drug sensitivity phenotypes when tested anaerobically; mdtEF is induced 20-fold anaerobically by ArcA, independent of drug exposure (Zhang, 2011). The endogenous function of MdtEF is proposed to be protection from nitrosated indole that accumulates during anaerobic nitrate resiration; the decreased mdtEF mutant survival rate observed during anaerobic respiration of nitrate is eliminated with the deletion of tnaAB (indole synthesis) or when fumrate is used instead of nitrate as the terminal electron acceptor (Zhang, 2011). EvgAS regulon. ArcA regulon. The first 20 aa of MdtE are a type II signal peptide. N-acetyl-D-glucosamine inducible, via Crp (Hirakawa, 2006). Crp represses mdtEF (Nishino, 2008).	b3513
mdtF	yhiV	anaerobic multidrug efflux transporter, ArcA-regulated	Putative transport; Not classified	Anaerobic multidrug efflux transporter MdtEF-TolC; toxic nitrosated indole efflux; RND family permease component	When expressed from a multi-copy plasmid mdtEF confers multidrug resistance to a variety of compounds including rhodamine, erythromycin, deoxycholate, benzalkonium, doxorubicin, EtBr, SDS, and crystal violet (Nishino, 2001). mdtEF mutant cells exhibit drug sensitivity phenotypes when tested anaerobically; mdtEF is induced 20-fold anaerobically by ArcA, independent of drug exposure (Zhang, 2011). The endogenous function of MdtEF is proposed to be protection from nitrosated indole that accumulates during anaerobic nitrate resiration; the decreased mdtEF mutant survival rate observed during anaerobic respiration of nitrate is eliminated with the deletion of tnaAB (indole synthesis) or when fumrate is used instead of nitrate as the terminal electron acceptor (Zhang, 2011). EvgAS regulon. ArcA regulon. HT_Cmplx27_Mem: AcrB+MdtF. N-acetyl-D-glucosamine inducible, via Crp (Hirakawa, 2006). Crp represses mdtEF (Nishino, 2008).	b3514
gadW	yhiW	transcriptional activator of gadA and gadBC; repressor of gadX	Putative regulator; Not classified	Transcriptional activator of gadA and gadBC; repressor of gadX	GadW is a transcriptional activator of the gadA gene and the gadBC operon working both in conjunction with or independent of GadX. pgsA mutants are non-motile due to elevated RpoS levels that repress flhDC transcription; pgsA3 multicopy suppressers gadW, metE and nudL(yeaB) act by increasing RpoS levels (Uchiyama, 2010). AraC family.	b3515
gadX	yhiX	acid resistance regulon transcriptional activator; autoactivator	Null	Transcriptional activator for gadA and gadBC, AraC family; repressed by HNS and GadW; stimulated by RpoS	Null	b3516
yhjA	None	putative cytochrome C peroxidase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Probable cytochrome c peroxidase; mutants are sensitive to peroxide during anaerobic growth	FNR regulon. OxyR regulon.	b3518
treF	None	cytoplasmic trehalase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Cytoplasmic trehalase	Glycoside hydrolase family 37.	b3519
yhjB	None	putative DNA-binding transcriptional response regulator	Putative regulator; Not classified	Predicted two-component system response regulator, function unknown; CheY-like receiver domain, LuxR-like HTH domain; cognate sensor protein is unknown	Null	b3520
yhjC	None	LysR family putative transcriptional regulator	Putative regulator; Not classified	Predicted transcriptional regulator, function unknown	Null	b3521
yhjD	None	inner membrane putative BrbK family alternate lipid exporter	Null	Probable BrkB family lipid IVA exporter; suppressor of msbA and KDO essentiality; LPS transport inner membrane protein	Electron micrographs of yhjD mutants reveal envelope perturbations similar to lptBCFG mutants; YhjD binds LptB and core LPS; yhjD mutants accumulate intracellular lipid A precursors (Babu, 2011). A point mutation in yhjD confering an R134C substitution was isolated repeatedly as a suppressor of the lethal KDO null phenotype of a srlQ kdsD double mutant and shown to permit the deletion of msbA, suggesting the mutant can export toxic lipid IV-A accumulating in the KDO mutant (Mamat, 2008). RbbA and YhjD interact (Babu, 2011). YhjD is not related to RNase BN; the distant paralog yihY was previously misidentified as the rbn gene and the error persists in many databases. YihY and YhjD belong to the B. pertussis virulence factor BrkB family (PF03631), formerly known as the UPF0761 family, although they have not been shown to be virulence factor in E. coli (Fernandez, 1994).	b3522
yhjE	None	putative MFS transporter; membrane protein	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative MFS transporter, function unknown; membrane protein	YhjE is a member of the Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS) of transporters. The yhjE promoter region binds ArcA and ArcA represses yhjE expression (Federowicz, 2014).	b3523
yhjG	yhjF	putative inner membrane-anchored periplasmic AsmA family protein	Null	Putative inner membrane-anchored AsmA family protein; periplasmic; function unknown	Although no association of AsmA with the OM was detected, AsmA superfamily members YhjG and YicH (but not AsmA itself) were predicted to be beta-barrel proteins indicating that the inner membrane-anchored AsmA family proteins may also insert into the outer membrane, consistent with their putative role in OM protein assembly and OM maintenance (Zhai, 2009). SignalP and TMHMM indicate a single N-terminal transmembrane segment of YhjG may serve as a signal anchor.	b3524
yhjH	None	cyclic-di-GMP phosphodiesterase, FlhDC-regulated	Null	Cyclic-di-GMP phosphodiesterase, FlhDC-regulated; impaired swimming; suppresses motility defect of hns mutants in multicopy	Overexpressed Salmonella typhimurium YhjH (STM3611) enhances motility, counteracts cellulose biosynthesis and the rdar phenotype, and mediates cyclic-di-GMP degradation (Simm, 2004). YhjH contains a cyclic-di-GMP phosphodiesterase EAL domain. The increased motility of the hns suppressing E. coli yhjH clones is consistent with the model that low cyclic di-GMP favors motility over sessility. FlhDC flagellar regulon. YhjH and YdiV are single domain EAL proteins. yhjH mutants have reduced swimming motility, dependent on ycgR and yegE: a null ycgR mutation fully suppress the yhjH motility defect; a null yegE mutation partially suppresses yhjH; a null yedQ mutation barely suppresses yhjH; a null ydaM mutation does not suppress yhjH (Figure 3A) (Pesavento, 2008). yhjH mutants have reduced swimming motility but normal swarming due to a defect in the frequency of flagellar motor switching (Girgis, 2007). The motility defect of yhjH mutations is suppressed by multicopy yfgF and by mutations in ycgR, fliZ, yfiR, yegE, crfC(yjdA), and yjcZ (Girgis, 2007). YhjH appers to have PDE activity despite having a partially defective EAL domain (Sommerfeldt, 2009).	b3525
kdgK	yhjI	2-dehydro-3-deoxygluconokinase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	2-dehydro-3-deoxygluconokinase; 2-keto-3-deoxygluconokinase	KDG is derived from pectin, a common plant heteropolysaccharide, although E. coli K-12 does not secrete pectinases or uptake pectin oligosaccharides and has only the core KDG regulon as compared to plant pathogens like Erwinia chrysanthemi, whose extracellular pectate lyases and intacellular oligogalacturonate lyase breaks pectin down mainly into 5-keto-4-deoxyuronate (DKI) monomers and to a lesser extent polygalacturonase-generated galacturonate; in E. coli K-12 galacturonate uptake and degradation is mediated by the ExuT permease and the UxaABC catabolic enzymes producing KDG, respectively, and DKI is imported by the KdgR-regulated KDG importer KdgT and catabolized to KDG by the KdgR-regulated KduID enyzymes, also producing KDG; KDG is converted to pyruvate and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate by KdsK and Eda(KdsA) (Rodionov, 2004; Hugouvieux-Cotte-Pattat, 1996). KdgK is elevated 3-5X during growth at 4C (enabled by Oleispira antarctica Cpn10/60 transgene). This reliable gene assignment of kdgK is based on DNA and protein sequence analysis consistent with the published map position and function, respectively, of KdgK (Sofia, 1994). HT_Cmplx44_Mem: GlpC+KdgK+YahK.	b3526
yhjJ	None	putative periplasmic M16 family chaperone	Null	Predicted degenerate periplasmic zinc metalloendopeptidase; M16 protease family; possible chaperone protein	PqqL, PtrA and YhjJ belong to the M16 zinc metalloendopeptidase family. YhjJ has a single M16 protease two-domain module, with an N-terminal M16 domain (PF000675) and a structurally homologous inactive C-terminal M-16 domain (PF05193); the YhjJ N-terminal domain active site should be HXXEH but it is HXXPR, indicating that YhjJ probably has no protease activity, but it may have chaperone activity (K.E.R.).	b3527
yhjK	None	cyclic-di-GMP phosphodiesterase	Null	Cyclic-di-GMP phosphodiesterase associated with cellulose production; dual domain protein; defective cyclase domain	A yhjK mutant has increased biofilm formation indicative of an increase in intracellular c-di-GMP (Chen, 2011). Although YhjK activity has not yet been assayed in vitro, a yhjK mutant has an elevated level of c-di-GMP relative to a wildtype strain (Furukawa, 2012). YhjK is a dual domain cyclic-di-GMP phosphodiesterase with a defective diguanylate cyclase central domain: the I-site (RxxD) is missing and the A-site is SGYDF in place of the GGDEF; YhjK has a C-terminal EAL domain, however the HAMP linker signaling domain was not detected (Sommerfeldt, 2009). YhjK has a HAMP signaling domain (162-232) and two transmembrane segments (12-32; 159-176) that anchor the cytoplasmic HAMP linker, EAL and defective GGDEF domains to the inner membrane. The HAMP linker signal transduction domain is detected using EBI's InterProScan (PF00672, E=5.3E-11) but produces only insignificant matches to HAMP linker profiles using NCBI's CD-Search (PF00672, E=0.15; cd06225, E=0.10); InterProScan also detects the HAMP linker domain as matching ProSite PS50885 at a slightly different location (180-236), as annotated in UniProtKB P37649. YhjK residues 33-158 probably constitute a periplasmic sensing (signal input) domain related to biofilm and cellulose production. yhjK may be the last gene in the defective yhjR-bcsQ'ZCABC-yhjK operon. The presence of an in-frame stop codon mutation in the bcsQ gene abolishes cellulose production and bcs divergent operon function in E. coli K-12. BcsA and BcsB are predicted to bind c-di-GMP.	b3529
bcsC	yhjL	cellulose synthase subunit	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Oxidase involved in cellulose production, contains TPR repeats	The bcsQ' domestication in-frame stop codon pseudogene defect in K-12 strain W3110 has been repaired, restoring cellulose production, colony morphology, biofilm architecture, and the divergent bcs operons' functions to a presumably wildtype status (Serra, 2013). The presence of an in-frame stop codon mutation in the bcsQ' gene abolishes cellulose production and bcs divergent operon function in E. coli K-12. The first 23 aa of BcsC are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b3530
bcsZ	bcsC, yhjM	endo-1,4-D-glucanase	Null	Endo-1,4-D-glucanase; breaks down carboxymethylcellulose; periplasmic cellulase	The bcsQ' domestication in-frame stop codon pseudogene defect in K-12 strain W3110 has been repaired, restoring cellulose production, colony morphology, biofilm architecture, and the divergent bcs operons' functions to a presumably wildtype status (Serra, 2013). The first 21 aa of BcsZ are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. Probable false positive lipoprotein prediction; a soluble periplasmic BcsZ protein is predicted. The presence of an in-frame stop codon mutation in the bcsQ' gene abolishes cellulose production and bcs divergent operon function in E. coli K-12.	b3531
bcsB	yhjN	regulator of cellulose synthase, cyclic di-GMP binding	Null	Cellulose synthase, regulatory subunit; binds cyclic-di-GMP; periplasmic, membrane-anchored	Inverted membrane vesicles prepared from E. coli cells overexpressing E. coli K-12 BcsA and BcsB can synthesize cellulose in the presence of c-di-GMP (Omadjela, 2013). Overproduction of BcsB enhances exopolysaccharide production, flocculation (cell aggregation) in liquid culture, and biofilm formation, possibly incuding cellulose production, which most K-12 strains cannot make because of a mutation in bcsQ (Nguyen, 2014). The bcsQ' domestication in-frame stop codon pseudogene defect in K-12 strain W3110 has been repaired, restoring cellulose production, colony morphology, biofilm architecture, and the divergent bcs operons' functions to a presumably wildtype status (Serra, 2013). The presence of an in-frame stop codon mutation in the bcsQ' gene abolishes cellulose production and bcs divergent operon function in E. coli K-12. BcsB has a predicted 25 aa type I signal peptide.	b3532
bcsA	yhjO, yhjP	cellulose synthase, catalytic subunit	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Celullose synthase, catalytic subunit; inner membrane protein	Inverted membrane vesicles prepared from E. coli cells overexpressing E. coli K-12 BcsA and BcsB can synthesize cellulose in the presence of c-di-GMP (Omadjela, 2013). The bcsQ' domestication in-frame stop codon pseudogene defect in K-12 strain W3110 has been repaired, restoring cellulose production, colony morphology, biofilm architecture, and the divergent bcs operons' functions to a presumably wildtype status (Serra, 2013). BcsA has a C-terminal PilZ domain; the PilZ domain of YcgR has been implicated in cyclic-di-GMP binding. The presence of an in-frame stop codon mutation in the bcsQ' gene abolishes cellulose production and bcs divergent operon function in E. coli K-12.	b3533
bcsQ'	yhjQ	involved in cellulose production, minD superfamily (pseudogene)	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction; required for cellulose production	The bcsQ' domestication in-frame stop codon pseudogene defect in K-12 strain W3110 has been repaired, restoring cellulose production, colony morphology, biofilm architecture, and the divergent bcs operons' functions to a presumably wildtype status (Serra, 2013). The bcsQ'(yhjQ') stop codon 6 is translated as an X in the reconstructed protein sequence; other E. coli strains have a Leu codon at this position (K.E.R., 2001, unpublished results cited in UniProt P37655). A previously reported filamentous phenotype for a bcsQ(yhjQ) mutant in a K-12 C600 background (which conflicted with its pseudogene status) has been retested in K-12 strains C600 and MG1655 and no phenotype of knocking out the pseudogene was observed (Kim, 2002; Le Quere, 2009). BcsQ(YhjQ) is required for cellulose production in vivo and for localization of cellulose synthase to a cell pole; the function of BcsQ(YhjQ) was determined in a cellulose-producing E. coli strain 1094, which has an intact copy of bcsQ(yhjQ) (Le Quere, 2009). BcsQ(YhjQ) is a member of the ParA/Soj subfamily of the Mrp/MinD family of P-loop ATPases. The presence of an in-frame stop codon mutation in the bcsQ' gene abolishes cellulose production and bcs divergent operon function in E. coli K-12.	b3534
yhjR	None	DUF2629 family protein	Null	Putative protein, function unknown	yhjR may be the first gene in the defective yhjR-bcsQ'ZCABC-yhjK operon. A yhjR mutant does not block cellulose synthesis in the cellulose producing strain E. coli 1094 (Le Quere, 2009). The presence of an in-frame stop codon mutation in the bcsQ' gene abolishes cellulose production and bcs operon function in E. coli K-12.	b3535
bcsE	yhjS	cellulose production protein	Null	Protein required for cellulose production	The bcsQ' domestication in-frame stop codon pseudogene defect in K-12 strain W3110 has been repaired, restoring cellulose production, colony morphology, biofilm architecture, and the divergent bcs operons' functions to a presumably wildtype status (Serra, 2013). The presence of an in-frame stop codon mutation in the bcsQ' gene abolishes cellulose production and bcs divergent operon function in E. coli K-12.	b3536
bcsF	yhjT	DUF2636 family cellulose production small membrane protein	Null	DUF2636 family small membrane protein; associated with cellulose production	The bcsQ' domestication in-frame stop codon pseudogene defect in K-12 strain W3110 has been repaired, restoring cellulose production, colony morphology, biofilm architecture, and the divergent bcs operons' functions to a presumably wildtype status (Serra, 2013). Salmonella BcsG was erroneously predicted to be an endoglucanase based on a match to an unnannotated gene downstream of the Cellulomonas uda endoglucanase gene in Genbank M36503 (Solano, 2002). The presence of an in-frame stop codon mutation in the bcsQ' gene abolishes cellulose production and bcs divergent operon function in E. coli K-12.	b3537
bcsG	yhjU	DUF3260 family cellulose production inner membrane protein	Null	DUF3260 family inner membrane protein; associated with cellulose production	The bcsQ' domestication in-frame stop codon pseudogene defect in K-12 strain W3110 has been repaired, restoring cellulose production, colony morphology, biofilm architecture, and the divergent bcs operons' functions to a presumably wildtype status (Serra, 2013). The presence of an in-frame stop codon mutation in the bcsQ' gene abolishes cellulose production and bcs divergent operon function in E. coli K-12.	b3538
yhjV	None	putative transporter	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative amino acid:H+ symport permease, function unknown	HAAAP family.	b3539
eptB	pagC(S.t.), yhjW	KDO phosphoethanolamine transferase, Ca(2+)-inducible	Null	KDO phosphoethanolamine transferase, Ca(2+)-inducible; required for Ca(2+) tolerance of heptose-deficient cells	Localized to the inner membrane by subcellular fractionation (Reynolds, 2005). ygdQ and eptB are negatively regulated by the mgrR sRNA (Moon, 2009).	b3546
yhjX	oxlT(O.f.)	pyruvate-inducible inner membrane protein, putative transporter	Putative transport; Drug/analog sensitivity	Putative MFS antiporter, pyruvate-inducible; inner membrane protein	YhjX is the only protein directly regulated by the pyruvate-sensing YpdAB two-component system: YpdB binds to the yhjX promoter region, YpdB overproduction increased yhjX expression 24-fold, and deletion of ypdABC prevented induction by the pyruvate in LB; the induction was restored by a ypdAB clone; YpdB overproduction indrectly increased yjiY expression 4-fold since yjiY has no YpdB binding site (Fried, 2013). yhjX expression increased 50-fold in a yehTU mutant, but yhjX is indirectly repressed since YehT does not bind the yhjX promoter region (Kraxenberger, 2012). YhjX has been experimentally shown to be an integral membrane protein (Daley, 2005; Fried, 2013). The YpdAB and YehTU two-component regulators are paralogous; these two systems may be interconnected since they both regulate yjiY, directly by YehTU and indirectly by YpdAB; although not noted by the authors, both sytems also regulate yhjX, indirectly by YehTU and directly by YpdAB; the putative transporter genes yhjX and yjiY are the only two genes significantly regulated by YpdAB and YehTU (Fried, 2013). Caveat: experiments using overproduction of response regulators may cause artifactual cross-talk regulation. YhjX is similar to OxlT from Oxalobacter formigenes and may be an oxalate-formate antiporter; alternatively YhjX may be involved with pyruvate transport. YhjX may function with frc and oxc to catabolize oxalate. Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS). The yhjX promoter region binds ArcA (Federowicz, 2014).	b3547
yhjY	None	autotransporter beta-domain protein	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Autotransporter beta-domain protein, function unknown	A predicted 30 aa signal peptide for YhjY is consistent with an observed precursor cleavage, blocked by azide. The Salmonella yhjY ortholog is regulated by RpoS.	b3548
yiaC	None	GNAT family putative N-acetyltransferase	Null	GNAT family putative N-acetyltransferase	Null	b3550
yiaD	None	multicopy suppressor of bamB; outer membrane lipoprotein	Putative membrane; Not classified	Multicopy suppressor of bamD, function unknown; verified lipoprotein; OmpA homolog	YiaD is a multicopy suppressor of bamD(Ts) and yiaD mutations confer slower growth in a bamD(Ts) background (Tachikawa, 2011). The yiaD mutants in the Keio collection have been shown to harbor an intact copy of yiaD in addition to the deletion allele (Yamamoto, 2009). The first 20 aa of YiaD are a type II signal peptide.	b3552
ghrB	tkrA, yiaE	glyoxylate/hydroxypyruvate reductase B	Null	Glyoxylate/hydroxypyruvate reductase B; 2-ketogluconate reductase; activity higher on hydroxypyruvate than glyoxylate	Although two groups have verified this start site by protein sequencing, 6/171 peptide masses from MS analysis indicate that an start four codons upstream is utilized; on the other hand, 1/171 peptides did confirm the current start site (Maillet, 2007). 	b3553
yiaF	None	barrier effect co-colonization resistance factor; DUF3053 family lipoprotein	Null	Barrier effect co-colonization resistance factor; DUF3053 family lipoprotein	Mice colonized with an MG1655 yiaF mutant strain are less able to resist co-colonization with pathogenic EAEC 55989, i.e. yiaF mutants exhibit a reduced barrier effect (Da Re, 2013). YiaF has been identified as a membrane-associated protein by 2D-MS, with a non-uniform membrane distribution, indicating both polar and septal bias (Lai, 2004). Interpretation of YiaF results in Lai et al. (2004) was complicated by use of a predicted start site at Met(-40). A null mutant has no obvious growth defect (Lai, 2004). Reported MS detection of a fragment from 19R-30E (stated as 50R-69E in Lai, 2004) may indicate the presence of an uncleaved precursor form in minicell membrane preparations. The first 25 aa of YiaF are predicted to be a type II signal peptide. HT_Cmplx47_Mem: MscS+YiaF.	b3554
wecH	yiaH	O-acetyltransferase for enterobacterial common antigen (ECA)	Null	O-acetyltransferase for enterobacterial common antigen (ECA)	Null	b3561
xylG	None	D-xylose ABC transporter dual domain ATPase	Transport; Sugar metabolism	D-xylose ABC transporter ATPase, tandem domains	Null	b3567
xylH	None	D-xylose ABC transporter permease	Putative transport; Not classified	D-xylose ABC transporter permease	Null	b3568
yiaJ	None	transcriptional repressor for the yiaKLMNO-lyxK-sgbHUE operon	Putative regulator; Not classified	Repressor for the yiaK operon; IclR homolog; autorepressor	YiaJ is a repressor for the divergent yiaKLMNO-lyxK-sgbHUE operon and is an autorepressor (Ibanez, 2000). YiaMNO is a TRAP family transporter for the monocarboxylate oxo-acid 2,3-diketo-L-gulonate (2,3-DKG), a spontaneous breakdown product of ascorbate, therefore it has been proposed that the YiaJ effector molecule is 2,3-DKG (Thomas, 2006).	b3574
yiaK	None	2,3-diketo-L-gulonate reductase, NADH-dependent	Putative enzyme; Not classified	2,3-diketo-L-gulonate reductase, NADH-dependent	YiaK may be involved in the utilization of L-dehydroascorbate, which can be spontaneously hydrolyzed to form the YiaK substrate 2,3-diketo-L-gulonate, although conditions in which L-dehydroascorbate is utilized have not yet been found (Yew, 2002).	b3575
yiaL	None	DUF386 family protein	Putative enzyme; Not classified	DUF386 family protein, cupin superfamily	yiaL is in an operon possibly involved in the utilization of 2,3-diketo-L-gulonate, the product of the spontaneous hydrolysis of L-dehydroascorbate. EbgC is a distant homolog of YiaL, YhcH and TabA(YjgK), all four match PF04074; although homologous to the beta subunit of the EbgAC evolved beta-galactosidase, no potential EbgA-like alpha subunit partners are apparent for the other three DUF386 family proteins.	b3576
yiaM	None	2,3-diketo-L-gulonate TRAP transporter small permease protein	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	2,3-diketo-L-gulonate TRAP transporter small permease protein; TRAP (TRipartite ATP-independent Periplasmic) family 2,3-diketo-L-gulonate:Na+ symporter YiaMNO	The proposed L-xylulose transport primary function for YiaMNO is inconsistent with the fact that 2,3-diketo-L-gulonate, not L-xylulose, binds to YiaO (Plantinga, 2004; Thomas, 2006). Probable false positive lipoprotein prediction, Cys not conserved, four inner membrane TMs predicted. A yiaMNO deletion is reported to have alterations in the transition from exponential growth to the stationary phase, high-salt survival and biofilm formation (Plantinga, 2005). L-dehydroascorbate in the environment can be spontaneously hydrolyzed to form the YiaMNO substrate 2,3-diketo-L-gulonate. A yiaN (orfM) mutant is able to grow on dicarboxylates, indicating that YiaMNO is not involved in dicarboxylate transport (Davies, 1999).	b3577
yiaN	None	2,3-diketo-L-gulonate TRAP transporter large permease protein	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	2,3-diketo-L-gulonate TRAP transporter large permease protein; TRAP (TRipartite ATP-independent Periplasmic) family 2,3-diketo-L-gulonate:Na+ symporter YiaMNO	The proposed L-xylulose transport primary function for YiaMNO is inconsistent with the fact that 2,3-diketo-L-gulonate, not L-xylulose, binds to YiaO (Plantinga, 2004; Thomas, 2006). L-dehydroascorbate in the environment can be spontaneously hydrolyzed to form the YiaMNO substrate 2,3-diketo-L-gulonate. Twelve transmembrane helices predicted. A yiaMNO deletion is reported to have alterations in the transition from exponential growth to the stationary phase, high-salt survival and biofilm formation (Plantinga, 2005). IT (Ion Transporter) superfamily (Prakash, 2003). ST(3) structural class based on hydropathy profile (Lolkema, 2003). A yiaN (orfM) mutant is able to grow on dicarboxylates, indicating that YiaMNO is not involved in dicarboxylate transport (Davies, 1999).	b3578
yiaO	None	2,3-diketo-L-gulonate-binding periplasmic protein	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	2,3-diketo-L-gulonate-binding periplasmic protein; TRAP (TRipartite ATP-independent Periplasmic) family 2,3-diketo-L-gulonate:Na+ symporter YiaMNO	The proposed L-xylulose transport primary function for YiaMNO is inconsistent with the fact that 2,3-diketo-L-gulonate, not L-xylulose, binds to YiaO (Plantinga, 2004; Thomas, 2006). L-dehydroascorbate in the environment can be spontaneously hydrolyzed to form the YiaMNO substrate 2,3-diketo-L-gulonate. A yiaMNO deletion is reported to have alterations in the transition from exponential growth to the stationary phase, high-salt survival and biofilm formation (Plantinga, 2005). The cleavage of first 24 aa, a type I signal peptide, was confirmed using MS (Thomas, 2006). A yiaN (orfM) mutant is able to grow on dicarboxylates, indicating that YiaMNO is not involved in dicarboxylate transport (Davies, 1999).	b3579
lyxK	lyx, xylK, yiaP	L-xylulose kinase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	L-xylulose/3-keto-L-gulonate kinase	The LyxK L-xylulose kinase activity is part of a novel pathway for metabolism of lyxose via xylulose through the rhamnose and pentose phosphate shunt pathways (Sanchez, 1994). The LyxK 3-keto-L-gulonate kinase activity is probably involved in the utilization of 2,3-diketo-L-gulonate, which can be formed by the spontaneous hydrolysis of dehydroascorbate (Yew, 2002).	b3580
sgbH	yiaQ	3-keto-L-gulonate 6-phosphate decarboxylase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	3-keto-L-gulonate-6-phosphate decarboxylase; required for the aerobic utilization of L-ascorbate but not for fermentation; L-xylulose catabolism	SgbH(YiaQ) is possibly involved in the utilization of 2,3-diketo-L-gulonate, which can be formed by the hydrolysis of dehydroascorbate (Yew, 2002). A mutation in sgbH(yiaQ) blocked catabolism of xylulose formed from exogenous lyxose, but complementation with a sgbU(yiaR) plasmid indicated this was a polar effect and that sgbH(yiaQ) is not required for the catabolism of xylulose formed from exogenous lyxose (Ibañez, 2000).	b3581
sgbU	yiaR	putative L-xylulose 5-phosphate 3-epimerase	Putative enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	Predicted L-xylulose 5-phosphate 3-epimerase; required for the aerobic utilization of L-ascorbate but not for fermentation; L-xylulose catabolism	SgbU(YiaR) is possibly involved in the utilization of 2,3-diketo-L-gulonate, spontaneously generated by the hydrolysis of dehydroascorbate, the oxidation product of ascorbate (Yew, 2002). In vitro L-xylulose 5-phosphate 3-epimerase activity could not be demonstrated, suggesting either unstable enzyme or wrong substrate (Ibañez, 2000; Yew, 2002). A mutation in sbgU, complemented by an sbgU clone, blocked catabolism of xylulose formed from exogenous lyxose (Ibañez, 2000).	b3582
sgbE	yiaS	L-ribulose-5-phosphate 4-epimerase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	L-ribulose 5-phosphate 4-epimerase; required for the aerobic utilization of L-ascorbate but not for fermentation; L-xylulose catabolism	SgbE(YiaS) is possibly involved in the utilization of 2,3-diketo-L-gulonate, which can be formed by the hydrolysis of dehydroascorbate (Yew, 2002). A mutation in sbgE(yiaS) did not block xylulose catabolism formed from exogenous lyxose because lyxose induces the ara operon and AraD and SgbE(YibS) are isofunctional; a clone of either araD or sgbE(yiaS) can correct the xylulose catabolism defect of a double mutant; if the real inducer of sbgE(yiaS) operon does not induce the ara operon, then SbgE(YiaS) function would be required under normal operon induction conditions (Ibañez, 2000).	b3583
yiaT	None	putative outer membrane protein	Putative membrane; Not classified	Predicted outer membrane protein, function unknown	The first 21 aa of YiaT are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. MipA paralog.	b3584
yiaU	None	putative DNA-binding transcriptional regulator	Putative regulator; Not classified	LysR-family transcriptional regulator, function unknown	Null	b3585
yiaV	None	signal-anchored membrane fusion protein (MFP) component of efflux pump 	Putative membrane; Not classified	Function unknown; putative membrane fusion protein (MFP) component of efflux pump, signal anchor	Null	b3586
yiaW	None	DUF3302 family inner membrane protein	Null	DUF3302 family inner membrane protein, function unknown	Null	b3587
aldB	yiaX	aldehyde dehydrogenase B	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Aldehyde dehydrogenase, NADP-dependent; tetrameric	Null	b3588
yiaY	None	L-threonine dehydrogenase	Enzyme; Not classified	L-threonine dehydrogenase	YiaY is an NAD-dependent L-threonine dehydrogenase (Ma, 2014). A YiaY ortholog is repressed in a fur mutant in Shewanella oneidensi (Thompson, 2002). Pfam PF00465 Fe-ADH family.	b3589
grxC	yibM	glutaredoxin 3	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Thioredoxin, glutaredoxin, glutathione	Glutaredoxin 3	Null	b3610
yibN	None	putative rhodanese-related sulfurtransferase	Null	Putative rhodanese	The yibN-envC,gpmM,yibQ divergent operon promoter region binds FNR and yibN expression is activated by FNR (Federowicz, 2014). glpE, yceA and yibN are paralogs.	b3611
gpmM	gpmC, gpmI, pgmI, yibO	phosphoglycero mutase III, cofactor-independent	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Phosphoglycerate mutase, Mn-dependent, cofactor-independent; iPGM; monomeric	Salmonella typhimurium gpmM mutants grow poorly on minimal media supplemented with various carbon sources (Kehres, 2003). E. coli gpmM mutants do not have a growth defect on minimal medium with glucose but alternative carbon sources were not tested (Foster, 2010). Purified GpmA has 10-20 times higher specific actvity than GpmM (Fraser, 1999; Foster, 2010). Purified GpmM contains Mn(2+) (Fraser, 1999). GpmM has four-fold higher specific activity with Mn(2+) than Mg(2+); Co(2+) also stimulated activity (Foster, 2010). gpmM and gpmA are non-essential genes but phosphoglycerate mutase is an essential enzyme since a gpmA gpmM double mutation is lethal (Foster, 2010). The yibN-envC,gpmM,yibQ divergent operon promoter region binds FNR and envC-gpmM-yibQ expression is activated by FNR (Federowicz, 2014). HT_Cmplx25_Cyt: GpmA+GpmM.	b3612
envC	slm11, yibP	activator of AmiB,C murein hydrolases, septal ring factor	Enzyme; Murein sacculus, peptidoglycan	Activator of AmiB,C murein hydrolases, septal ring factor	NlpD, YgeR, MepM(YebA) and EnvC have C-terminal LytM domains; mutating all four LytM domain genes produces a strain with a severe filamentous phenotype, similar to an amiABC triple mutant, of over 20 times the normal cell length and more than 70 times the normal amount of septa/cell, from 0.5 to 36 septa/cell; also similar to the amiABC mutant, the nlpD-envC-mepM(yebA)-ygeR mutant has altered morphology and delayed onset of lysis after beta-lactam antibiotic treatment (Uehara, 2009). envC is a synthetic lethal with minCDE (Bernhardt, 2004). EnvC is recruited to the septal ring (Bernhardt, 2004; Uehara, 2009). EnvC is needed for FtsZ ring formation at 42C (Ichimura, 2002). EnvC has weak in vitro endoproteolytic activity against beta-casein (Ichimura, 2002). The first 34 aa of EnvC are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. EnvZ is proteolytically processed and localized to the periplasm (Hara, 2000). EnvC apparently had murein hydrolytic activity in an in-gel assay with murein sacculi as substrate, although this is likely to have been due to contamination with AmiC (Bernhardt, 2004; Uehara, 2010). envZ mutants are sensitive to crystal violet. The yibN-envC,gpmM,yibQ divergent operon promoter region binds FNR and envC-gpmM-yibQ expression is activated by FNR (Federowicz, 2014).	b3613
yibQ	None	putative polysaccharide deacetylase	Null	Polysaccharide deacetylase family protein	The yibN-envC,gpmM,yibQ divergent operon promoter region binds FNR and envC-gpmM-yibQ expression is activated by FNR (Federowicz, 2014). The first 23 aa of YibQ are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. YibQ is a member of the Polysacc_deac_2 family (Pfam: PF04748).	b3614
rutR	ycdC	rut operon transcriptional repressor for 	Regulator; Pyrimidine nitrogen catabolism	Repressor for rut operon; pyrimidine nitrogen catabolism	RutR can be modified by lysine acetylation in vitro using purified E. coli Pka(YfiQ) (Thao, 2010). RutR is also the global regulator of a pyrimidine metabolism regulon (Shimada, 2007). TetR family. NtrC regulon. Constitutive derepression of the the rut operon (ntrB) is required for the utilization of thymidine, uridine and cytidine as nitrogen sources at 37C, but not at room temperature.	b1013
tmk	ycfG	thymidylate kinase	Enzyme; 2'-Deoxyribonucleotide metabolism	Thymidylate kinase	Essential gene.	b1098
ycfH	None	putative DNase	Null	Predicted DNase, tatD paralog, no Tat phenotype	Null	b1100
sapD	trkE	antimicrobial peptide ABC transporter ATPase	Putative transport; Not classified	Antimicrobial peptide ABC transporter ATPase; required for ATP-dependence of Trk K+ uptake systems	Overexpression causes filamentous biofilm formation. SapD(TrkE) is required for TrkAH activity and stimulates TrkAG transport rate (Bossemeyer, 1989; Dosch, 1991; Harms, 2001). Characterized initially in Salmonella. The proposal that the sap operon transports peptides (Groisman, 1992) has been challenged (Stumpe, 1997; Harms, 2001). SapA ATP-binding, but not hydrolysis, is required for stimulation of Trk (Harms, 2001).	b1291
sapF	None	antimicrobial peptide ABC transporter ATPase	Putative transport; Not classified	Antimicrobial peptide ABC transporter ATPase	Characterized initially in Salmonella. The proposal that the sap operon transports peptides (Parra-Lopez, 1993) has been challenged (Stumpe, 1997; Harms, 2001).	b1290
yccF	None	DUF307 family inner membrane protein	Null	DUF307 family inner membrane protein	Null	b0961
mgsA	mgs, yccG	methylglyoxal synthase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	Methylglyoxal synthase	Null	b0963
yfhH	None	putative DNA-binding transcriptional regulator	Null	Function unknown	Null	b2561
yjtD	lasT	putative methyltransferase	Null	Putative methyltransferase, function unknown	Null	b4403
pepB	yfhI	aminopeptidase B	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Peptidase B; broad specificity aminopeptidase	Null	b2523
iscX	yfhJ	Fe(2+) donor and activity modulator for cysteine desulfurase	Null	Fe(2+) donor and activity modulator for cysteine desulfurase	IscX serves both as a donor of Fe(2+) and as a regulator of cysteine desulfurase activity during Fe-S cluster assembly (Kim, 2014). Monomeric IscX forms octamers in the presence of iron; IscX binds IscS and both ferric and ferrous iron (Pastore, 2006). 	b2524
coaE	yacE	dephospho-CoA kinase	Orf; Not classified	Dephospho-CoA kinase; final step in CoA synthesis	The coaE mutants in the Keio collection have been shown to harbor an intact copy of coaE in addition to the deletion allele, indicating that coaE could not be deleted and that it is an essential gene (Yamamoto, 2009). The coaE is essential for growth as tested by genetic footprinting (Hare, 2001). The N-terminus of a recombinant CoaE protein was sequenced but this is not verification for the start codon of fMet cleavage since plasmid gene expression was forced at the ATG and an Ala was added during cloning between the fMet and the second Arg residue (Mishra, 2001).	b0103
zapD	yacF	FtsZ stabilizer	Null	FtsZ stabilizer	ZapD binding promotes FtsZ polymer bundling and inhibits the GTPase activity of FtsZ (Durand-Heredia, 2012). UPF0289 family.	b0102
yacG	None	DNA gyrase inhibitor	Null	DNA gyrase inhibitor; Zn(2+)-binding protein	YacG binds the C-terminal domain of GyrB, inhibiting its activity by blocking its binding to DNA (Sengupta, 2008).	b0101
yacH	None	DUF3300 family protein	Putative membrane; Not classified	DUF3300 family protein, function unknown	Null	b0117
acnB	yacI, yacJ	aconitate hydratase 2; aconitase B; 2-methyl-cis-aconitate hydratase	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: TCA cycle	Aconitate hydratase 2; aconitase B; 2-methyl-cis-aconitate hydratase; iron-sulfur cluster; monomeric	AcnB is the major catabolic aconitase interconverting citrate and iso-citrate via cis-aconitate during exponential growth (Cunningham, 1997). During oxidative stress inactive AcnB apo-enzyme without iron sulphur clusters binds the acnB mRNA 3' UTR, stabilizes acnB mRNA and increases AcnB synthesis, thus mediating a post-transcriptional positive autoregulatory switch (Tang, 1999). AcnB contains a 4Fe-4S cluster that requires either IscA or SufA for proper assembly (Tan, 2009). AcnB is required for the oxidation of propionate to pyruvate and for growth on propionate due to its 2-methyl-cis-aconitate hydratase activity (Brock, 2002). Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004).	b0118
cueO	cuiD(S.t.), yacK	multicopper oxidase (laccase)	Null	Multicopper oxidase (laccase), confers copper tolerance; oxidizes model substrate dimethoxyphenol; in vitro ferroxidase and phenoloxidase activities; regulated by copper-responsive CueR activator	CueO was the only copper-binding protein found using Cu-MIRAGE (Sevcenco, 2009; Sevcenco, 2012). Verified Tat substrate: CueO has a Tat/Sec (Class II) 28 aa signal peptide (Tullman-Ercek, 2007). 	b0123
can	yadF	carbonic anhydrase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	Carbonic anhydrase, beta class	can forms a synthetic lethal with cynT, rescued by high CO2. Can is reported to be a low abundance protein. 2/143 Can(YadF) peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is not removed (Maillet, 2007).	b0126
yadG	None	putative ABC transporter ATPase	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative ABC transporter ATPase	7/72 YadG peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed (Maillet, 2007).	b0127
yadH	None	putative ABC transporter permease	Null	Putative ABC transporter permease	YadH, YbhR, YbhS, YhhJ, and the RbbA C-terminal domain are paralogous ABC2-membrane permease family members (pfam01061/COG0842).	b0128
yadI	agaX	putative PTS Enzyme IIA	Putative transport; Not classified	Predicted PTS Enzyme IIA, sugar specificity unknown	YadI was propose to be the IIA(Aga), but the real EnzymeIIA(Aga) is deleted from E. coli K12.	b0129
yfaD	None	transposase_31 family protein	Null	Transposase_31 family protein, function unknown	Null	b2244
yadK	None	putative fimbrial-like adhesin protein	Putative structural component; Surface structures	Function unknown, FimA homolog	The first 28 aa of YadK are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b0136
yadL	None	putative fimbrial-like adhesin protein	Putative structural component; Surface structures	Predicted minor fimbrial gene, function unknown	The first 28 aa of YadL are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b0137
yadM	None	putative fimbrial-like adhesin protein	Putative structural component; Surface structures	Function unknown, FimA homolog	YadM is one of 25 FimA homologs in E. coli K-12. The first 23 aa of YadM are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b0138
yadN	None	putative fimbrial-like adhesin protein	Putative structural component; Surface structures	Function unknown, FimA homolog	YadN is one of 25 FimA homologs in E. coli K-12. The first 24 aa of YadN are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b0141
hrpB	yadO	putative ATP-dependent helicase	Enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	Predicted ATP-dependent helicase, function unknown	Null	b0148
ligT	yadP	2'-5' RNA ligase	Enzyme; tRNA modification	2'-5' RNA ligase	Null	b0147
clcA	eriC, yadQ	H(+)/Cl(-) exchange transporter	Transport; Not classified	H(+)/Cl(-) exchange transporter; involved in the extreme acid response	ClcA and ClcB encode redundant chloride transporters; single mutants have no phenotype. ClcA, ClcB and YfeO belong to the Pfam PF00654 Voltage_CLC family of ion channels and ion exchange transporters. Although the PDB structure 4FG6 is derived from E. coli strain S. sonnei Ss046, its protein sequence is identical to the K-12 allele.	b0155
erpA	yadR	iron-sulfur cluster insertion protein	Null	Iron-sulfur cluster insertion protein; A-type Fe-S protein; essential for respiratory growth	ErpA is required for respiratory growth; erpA mutants have reduced ubiquinone and menaquinone; ErpA can transfer Fe-S clusters to apo-IspG in vitro (Loiseau, 2007). iscA, sufA, and erpA are paralogs; nfuA is a possible HT gene with an N-terminal domain homologous to sufA and an additional thioredoxin-like C-terminal domain.	b0156
yadS	None	UPF0126 family inner membrane protein	Null	Inner membrane protein, UPF0126 family, function unknown	Null	b0157
btuF	yadT	vitamin B12 ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein	Null	Vitamin B12 periplasmic binding protein	Uncleaved precursor N-terminus was also sequenced, confirming this start site of translation. about 80% of the precursors had the initial Met cleaved. NESG Target EC1 (http://nesg.org).	b0158
cdaR	sdaR, yaeG	carbohydrate diacid regulon transcriptional regulator; autoregulator	Regulator; Not classified	Carbohydrate diacid regulon transcriptional regulator; autoregulator	Null	b0162
yaeH	None	UPF0325 family protein	Putative structure; Not classified	Function unknown, UPF0325 family	Null	b0163
yaeI	None	phosphodiesterase with model substrate bis-pNPP	Null	Phosphodiesterase, function unknown; has activity on model substrate bis-pNPP	The Tat-targeting of YaeI translocation could not be assessed (Tullman-Ercek, 2007). The first 26 aa of YaeI were predicted to be a signal sequence and were shown to export PhoA at 20% the level of the PhoA signal and to allow growth on maltose indicating translocation of MBP (Tullman-Ercek, 2007). No cleavage has been demonstrated for YaeI; SignalP and homology analysis do not support a signal peptide assignment for YaeI.	b0164
yagA	None	CP4-6 prophage; putative DNA-binding transcriptional regulator	Phage or Prophage Related	Function unknown, CP4-6 putative prophage remnant	Null	b0267
yagB'	None	pseudogene, CP4-6 prophage	Phage or Prophage Related	Pseudogene, antitoxin-related, defective prophage CP4-6; N-terminal fragment	YagB' is related to the prophage-encoded antitoxin genes yfjZ (CP4-57), yafW (CP4-6), and cbeA(yeeU) (CP4-44). The ISX' element has apparently deleted the end of yagB, fusing it to 13 insX' codons to make a 116 fusion pseudogene that may be expressed. The cognate toxin appears to have been deleted.	b0266
afuC	fbpC, yagC	CP4-6 prophage; putative ferric transporter subunit	Putative transport; Not classified; Phage or Prophage Related	Predicted ferric iron ABC transporter ATPase; orphan gene in a cryptic defective ABC transporter operon; CP4-6 prophage remnant	afuC is in a remnant of an operon that includes the afuB'(fbpB') pseudogene; an afuA(fbpA) ortholog is missing from K-12; afuC is missing its promoter; homologous to an iron-uptake system gene in Actinobacillus. InterPro uses the gene name fbpB, but there is already an fbp gene in K-12.	b0262
rseA	mclA, yfiJ	anti-sigma factor	Regulator; Global regulatory functions	Anti-RpoE sigma factor, spans inner membrane	The anti-sigma N-terminal RseA domain is linked to the periplasmic domain by a single membrane domain spanning residues 100-118. The periplasmic domain of RseA is first degraded by DegS; subsequent cytoplasmic domain degradation of RseA of requires RseP(YaeL). The RseA Tyr46 is phoshorylated and is de-phosphorylated by Etp. rseA is transiently induced after a cold shock, dependent on the presence of PNPase. rseA mutants have elevated OM vesiculation (McBroom, 2006).	b2572
yjjJ	None	putative protein kinase	Putative enzyme; Protein modification	Putative HipA-superfamily protein kinase	YjjJ has the central (HipA-N; pfam07805) and C-terminal (HipA-C; pfam07804) HipA-like motifs but the N-terminal domain of YjjJ does not match the N-terminal HipA domain Couple_HipA (pfam13659). 4/47 YjjJ peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed (Maillet, 2007).	b4385
ettA	yjjK	energy-dependent translational throttle A	Factor; Proteins - translation and modification	Energy-dependent translational throttle A; ABC-F family protein	EttA is an energy-dependent translational throttle that gates ribosome entry into the elongation cycle, sensitive to ATP/ADP ratio because the ATP-bound form of EttA binds to the ribosomal tRNA-exit site and restricts ribosomal and tRNA movements, inhibiting protein synthesis; EttA is a procaryotic ABC-F family member defined by two ABC transporter-related predicted ATP-binding domains (Pfam:PF0005) joined by a linker domain with a P-site tRNA-interaction motif (PtIM) (Pfam: PF12848); an ettA mutation impairs fitness in long-term stationary phase; other ABC-F family members include eucaryotic translation-related factors and the E. coli K-12 proteins Uup, YbiT, and YheS (Boël, 2014; Chen, 2014). Low abundance protein.	b4391
pspF	ycjB	psp operon transcriptional activator	Regulator; Phage-related functions and prophages	Transcriptional sigma 54-dependent activator of psp	Null	b1303
ydfG	None	NADP-dependent 3-hydroxy acid dehydrogenase; malonic semialdehyde reductase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	NADP-dependent 3-hydroxy acid dehydrogenase; malonic semialdehyde reductase	YdfG has NADP-dependent L-allo-threonine oxidase activity, and other in vitro oxidase activities including on L-serine, D-serine, D-threonine and 3-hydroxyisobutyrate, although YdfG is presumed to be a reductase in vivo (Fujisawa, 2003). In vivo, YdfG can convert the toxic RutB product malonic semialdehyde into 3-hydroxypropionate and excrete it; and it is required for efficient growth using uridine as sole nitrogen source at 37C (in a rut operon constitutive ntrB background); YdfG is apparently supplementing the RutE presumed malonic semialdehyde reductase under these conditions since both are required to detoxify malonic semialdehyde and allow for efficient growth; both mutant growth defects are suppressed by NemA overproduction (Kim, 2010). The product of the oxidation of the 3-hydroxyl group of L-allo-threonine is aminoacetone, via spontaneous decarboxylation of the primary reaction product L-2-amino-3-ketobutyrate.	b1539
hokA	yiaZ	toxic polypeptide, small	Component of addiction module (incomplete)	Small toxic membrane polypeptide; homologous to plasmid-encoded plasmid stabilization toxins regulated by antisense RNA; functional relevance of chromosomal homologs is unknown	The hokA(yiaZ) gene was identified as a probable foreign toxin gene (Borodovsky, 1994). The hokA transcript is interrupted by IS150, interrupting and deleting part of the mokA and sokA regulatory genes.	b4455
yecC	None	putative ABC transporter ATPase	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative ABC transporter ATPase	FliY, YecC and YecS may constitute an ABC transport system for the import of L-cystine.	b1917
xisD'	ybcB	pseudogene, exisionase in defective prophage DLP12	Phage or Prophage Related	Pseudogene, exisionase fragment in defective prophage DLP12	A GAA where the stop codon should be probably reflects a point mutation in the stop codon acquired after a 5' deletion event inactivated xisD; since the stop codon is missing, for convenience xisD' is annotated as a having a 3' deletion of the stop codon even though no bases were deleted. XisD' is closely related to P22 exisionase. xisD' has 124 bp overlap with intD.	b4633
exoD'	ybcC	pseudogene, DLP12 prophage; phage-type exonuclease family	Phage or Prophage Related	Pseudogene, C-terminal exonuclease fragment, DLP12 prophage	ExoD' is nearly identical to the last 92 residues of phage lambda exonuclease, with three conservative replacements.	b0539
peaD'	ybcD	pseudogene; DLP12 prophage; replication protein family	Phage or Prophage Related	Pseudogene, phage lambda replication protein P family; C-terminal fragment, DLP12 prophage	PeaD' matches 99 of the last 103 aa of lambda P protein.	b4508
renD'	ybcE	pseudogene, DLP12 prophage	Phage or Prophage Related	Pseudogene reconstruction, DLP12 prophage; lambda ren homolog, interrupted by IS3C; putative activator of lit transcription	IS3C inserted at codon 30; no target site duplication is present. An intact version (one mismatch) is found in O157:H7 (NCBI gi 13361077).	b0542
ppiC	parvA	peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase C (rotamase C)	Enzyme; Proteins - translation and modification	Peptidylprolyl-cis-trans isomerase C, rotamase	Over-expression of cloned ppiB induces filamentation (Burke, 2013).	b3775
yifL	None	putative lipoprotein	Null	Probable lipoprotein, function unknown; Cys conserved	The first 19 aa of YifL are predicted to be a type II signal peptide.	b4558
arfB	yaeJ	alternative stalled-ribosome rescue factor B; peptidyl-tRNA hydrolase, ribosome-attached	Null	Alternative stalled-ribosome rescue factor B; peptidyl-tRNA hydrolase, ribosome-attached	arfB(yaeJ) is a multicopy suppressor of the synthetic lethality of ssrA and arfA; arfA mediates ssrA-independent ribosome rescue of non-stop and rare codon stalled ribosomes (Chadani, 2011a). ArfB(YaeJ) contains a pfam PF00472 RF-1 peptide chain release factor-related domain.	b0191
rtcR	yhgB	sigma 54-dependent transcriptional regulator of rtcBA expression	Putative regulator; Not classified	Transcriptional regulator for rtcAB	Null	b3422
fadK	ydiD	short chain acyl-CoA synthetase, anaerobic	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Acyl-CoA synthase, anaerobic	Null	b1701
ssuB	ycbE	aliphatic sulfonate ABC transporter ATPase	Transport; Not classified	Aliphatic sulfonate ABC transporter ATPase; sulfur starvation inducible	Cbl regulon.	b0933
ybgD	None	putative fimbrial-like adhesin protein	Putative structural component; Surface structures	FimA homolog, function unknown	YbgD is one of 25 FimA homologs in E. coli K-12. The first 23 aa of ybgD are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b0719
yfaE	None	ferredoxin involved with ribonucleotide reductase diferric-tyrosyl radical (Y*) cofactor maintenance	Null	Ferredoxin involved with ribonucleotide reductase cofactor; diferric-tyrosyl radical (Y*) cofactor maintenance	The yfaL-nrdAByfaE divergent operon promoter region binds FNR and nrdAB-yfaE operon expression is repressed by FNR (Federowicz, 2014).	b2236
kduD	ygeC, yqeD	2-dehydro-3-deoxy-D-gluconate 5-dehydrogenase; KDG oxidoreductase; 20-ketosteroid reductase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	2-dehydro-3-deoxy-D-gluconate 5-dehydrogenase; KDG oxidoreductase; DKII reductase; 20-ketosteroid reductase	Purified E. coli KduD is a 2-keto-3-deoxygluconate (KDG) oxidoreductase (2-deoxy-D-gluconate 3-dehydrogenase), also known as 2-dehydro-3-deoxy-D-gluconate 5-dehydrogenase, with a KDG Km of 30 mM; O. Hantz, Ph.D. thesis, Claude Bernard University, 1977, as cited by Tubeleviciute et al. (Tubeleviciute, 2014). KduI and KduD activities were initially determined in Erwinia chrysanthemi where they are required for pectin catabolism (Condemine, 1991). KDG is derived from pectin, a common plant heteropolysaccharide, although E. coli K-12 does not secrete pectinases or uptake pectin oligosaccharides and has only the core KDG regulon as compared to plant pathogens like Erwinia chrysanthemi, whose extracellular pectate lyases and intacellular oligogalacturonate lyase breaks pectin down mainly into 5-keto-4-deoxyuronate (DKI) monomers and to a lesser extent polygalacturonase-generated galacturonate; in E. coli K-12 galacturonate uptake and degradation is mediated by the ExuT permease and the UxaABC catabolic enzymes producing KDG, respectively, and DKI is imported by the KdgR-regulated KDG importer KdgT and catabolized to KDG by the KdgR-regulated KduID enyzymes, also producing KDG; KDG is converted to pyruvate and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate by KdsK and Eda(KdsA) (Rodionov, 2004; Hugouvieux-Cotte-Pattat, 1996). KduI and KduD activities were initially determined in Erwinia chrysanthemi where they are required for pectin catabolism; E. coli does not catabolize pectin (Condemine, 1991). The reversible KduD oxidoreductase converts DKII to KDG in vivo, displaying DKII reductase activity; the substrate for this reaction, 3-deoxy-D-glycero-2,5-hexodiulosonate (DKII), is also known as 3-deoxy-D-glycero-hexo-2,5-diulosonate, (4S)-4,6-dihydroxy-2,5-dioxohexanoate, or 2,5-diketo-3-deoxygluconate. KduI and KduD are inducible by galacturonate and glucuronate and are required for optimal utilization of galacturonate and glucuronate at high osmolarity, presumably substituting for salt-repressed UxaC; lactose catabolism generates intracellular hexuronates (Rothe, 2013). EC 1.1.1.125 (2-deoxy-D-gluconate 3-dehydrogenase) and EC 1.1.1.127 (2-dehydro-3-deoxy-D-gluconate 5-dehydrogenase) have 2-keto-3-deoxygluconate oxidoreductase and dehydrogenase as alternative names, respectively, leading to the previous misannotation of KduD as EC 1.1.1.125. KduD may be the hexuronate dehydrogenase required for hexuronate utilization at high osmolarity. KduD is a 20-ketosteroid reductase (a reversible 20-alpha-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase, EC 1.1.1.149) that catalyzes the in vitro reduction of a carbonyl group at the C20 position of steroid substrates with a hydroxyl group at position C21 including 11-deoxycorticosterone (11-DOC), 11-deoxycortisol (Reichstein's Compound S, RSS), cortisol, corticosterone, cortisone, and 21-hydroxypregnenolone; physiologically relevant Km values were determined for 11-DOC (0.23 mM) and RSS (0.19 mM) as well as low affinity substrate activities using the sugar substrates D-gluconate and 5-keto-D-gluconate (Hannermann, 2007; Tubeleviciute, 2014). 	b2842
menF	yfbA	isochorismate synthase 2	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Menaquinone, ubiquinone	Isochorismate synthase, menaquinone biosynthesis	Null	b2265
ygiL	None	putative fimbrial-like adhesin protein	Putative structural component; Surface structures	FimA homolog, function unknown	YgiL is one of 25 FimA homologs in E. coli K-12. The first 23 aa of YgiL are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b3043
intB'	int(P4), yjgC	pseudogene, integrase homology	IS, phage, Tn; Phage-related functions and prophages	Pseudogene reconstruction, P4-like integrase	A stop codon at position 19 of intB' is replaced with an X to reconstruct. The intB' pseudogene is adjacent to the leuX tRNA gene and may be the remnant of P2-like phage integration at leuX and subsequent loss. The region from leuX to yjhQ gene was once designated as prophage KpLE2 (Hayashi, 2001). Although this region contains several IS elements, it has no other phage gene homologs and has many core genes, and thus is unlikely to represent a prophage region; therefore all references to the KpLE2 prophage have been removed. The region clockwise from leuX through intB' has been designated as the PR-X prophage remnant and described as P2-like and highly deleted, although no length or right end was indicated (Casjens, 2003). PR-X has not been annotated as a defective prophage because it appeqrs to be limited to one pseudogene, intB' and the leuX-intB' intergenic region (K.E.R.).	b4271
prkB	prk?, yhfF	putative phosphoribulokinase	Putative enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Miscellaneous glucose metabolism	Predicted phosphoribulokinase	Null	b3355
rsmE	yggJ	16S rRNA m(3)U1498 methyltransferase, SAM-dependent	Enzyme; rRNA modification	16S rRNA m(3)U1498 methyltransferase, SAM-dependent	YggJ is RsmE; although growth is not obviously impaired, a wildtype rsmE+ strain outcompetes an rsmE mutant strain (Basturea, 2006). Member of the m(3)U MTases family DUF558 and the SAM MTase alpha/beta knot superfamily. Exponential reduction in cell growth only observed when co-cultured with wild type. The N-terminal domain (1-72) resembles an RNA binding domain. RrmA and TrmL(YibK) are structural paralogs. otherPDB (H. influenzae): 1NXZ, 1VHX.	b2946
cusA	silA(S.t.), ybdE	copper/silver efflux system, membrane component	Putative transport; Not classified	Silver and copper efflux, membrane transporter; overexpression confers low level fosfomycin resistance; confers copper and silver resistance	cusA is in the cusCFBA Cu and Ag efflux operon regulated by Cu and Ag.	b0575
znuB	yebI	zinc ABC transporter permease	Null	Zinc ABC transporter permease	Null	b1859
ydjE	None	putative MFS sugar transporter, membrane protein	Putative transport; Not classified	Predicted MFS transporter, function unknown; inner membrane protein	YdjE is a member of the Sugar Porter (SP) family within the Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS) of transporters.	b1769
intE	int(Lambda), ycfI	e14 prophage; putative integrase	Phage or Prophage Related	e14 integrase, in defective prophage	Null	b1140
nlpI	yhbM	lipoprotein involved in osmotic sensitivity and filamentation	Putative regulator; Not classified	Lipoprotein involved in osmotic sensitivity and filamentation	The first 18 aa of NlpI are a type II signal peptide. The NlpI region from 62 to 163 aa has three TPR repeats. nlpI mutants have elevated OM vesiculation (McBroom, 2006). In Salmonella, an nlpI mutant shows increased expresssion of csgD, csgA and decreased expression of yjcC; a pnp mutant shows the opposite response as an nlpI mutant (Rouf, 2011). The nlpI promoter region binds ArcA and ArcA activates nlpI expression (Federowicz, 2014).	b3163
ygdG	exo, xni	Ssb-binding protein, misidentified as ExoIX	Null	Ssb-binding protein, synthetic lethal with polA; no nuclease activity detected; flap endonuclease-like (FEN-like) protein	YgdG(Xni) has been crystallized in complex with DNA (Anstey-Gilbert, 2013). The previously reported exonuclease activity of YgdG(Xni) has been refuted due to copurification with ExoIII (Xth); purified YgdG(Xni) displayed no nuclease activities in vitro (Shafritz, 1998; Hodskinson, 2007). YgdG(Xni) binds Ssb (Hodskinson, 2007). YgdG(Xni) is homologous to the exonuclease domain of PolA (Sayers, 1994; Borodovsky, 1994). 3/19 YgdG(Xni) peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed (Maillet, 2007). Although both polA and ygdG(xni) deletions are viable, a double polA ygdG(xni) deletion strain is inviable (Fukushima, 2007). Although no nuclease activity has been demonstrated using purified YgdG(Xni), its homology to the PolA exonuclease domain, its DNA-binding ability, and its synthetic lethality with polA suggests that YgdG(Xni) might have in vivo exonuclease activity; perhaps needed substrates or co-factors were missing from the purified YgdG(Xni) assays (K.E.R., 2013).	b2798
ygdH	None	UPF0717 family protein	Null	Function unknown, UPF0717 family	Null	b2795
yhfG	vhpA(B.s.)	putative antitoxin for Fic	Null	Putative antitoxin for Fic	The B. schoenbuchensis YhfG homolog antitoxin VhpA binds to and inhibits the adenylyltransferase toxin VhpT that is homologous to Fic (Engel, 2012). Fic/YhfG may constitute a toxin/antitoxin pair (Yamaguchi, 2011). yhfG is repressed during biofilm formation (Ren, 2004). OtherPDB (B. schoenbuchensis): 3SHG.	b3362
ycaI	None	ComEC family inner membrane protein	Null	Competence protein ComEC homolog, inner membrane protein, function unknown	ycaI is predicted to have a CRP-S promoter co-regulated by both Crp and Sxy (Cameron, 2006). YcaI is predicted to be an integral membrane protein with 10 transmembrane segments.	b0913
yfeH	None	putative inorganic ion transporter	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Predicted inorganic ion transporter; required for swarming phenotype; regulated by YfeR	YfeR and yfeH have been characterized primarily in Salmonella (Banos, 2010).	b2410
yecD	None	isochorismatase family protein	Null	Isochorismatase family protein, function unknown	Null	b1867
yecE	None	UPF0759 family protein	Null	DUF72 family protein	UPF0759 family. A small peptide corresponding to the translation of an antisense ORF of yecE was detected in a shotgun MS experiment (Krug, 2013).	b1868
gntT	gntM, gntTalpha, usgA, yhgC	gluconate transporter, high-affinity GNT I system	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	High-affinity gluconate transport	IT (Ion Transporter) superfamily (Prakash, 2003). ST(3) structural class based on hydropathy profile (Lolkema, 2003).	b3415
nrdF	ygaD	ribonucleoside-diphosphate reductase 2, beta subunit, ferritin-like protein	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Nucleotide interconversions	Ribonucleoside-diphosphate reductase 2, beta subunit; class Ib aerobic ribonucleotide reductase	Fur regulon. RpoS regulon.	b2676
fxsA	yjeG	suppressor of F exclusion of phage T7	Null	Suppresses F exclusion of phage T7	Null	b4140
ybcF	arcC(P.a.)	putative carbonate kinase	Putative enzyme; Purine nitrogen catabolism	Putative carbonate kinase for anaerobic allantoin nitrogen catabolism	Based on homology and gene context analysis, YbcF has been proposed to be the orphan enzyme carbonic kinase needed for anaerobic allantoin catabolism (Smith, 2012). yqeA, yahI and ybcF are paralogs.	b0521
rcsD	yojN, yojP, yojQ	phosphotransfer intermediate protein in two-component regulatory system with RcsBC	Putative regulator; Not classified	Intermediate facilitates phosphotransfer from rcsC to rcsB; histidine protein kinase	Null	b2216
csiR	gabC, ygaE	transcriptional repressor of csiD	Regulator; Not classified	Repressor of csiD promoter	csiR (gabC) may not be part of the gab operon, appears to regulate the csiD promoter but not the gabD promoter, and is not responsive to gamma-aminobutyrate (Metzner, 2004).	b2664
lhgO	ygaF	L-2-hydroxyglutarate oxidase	Null	L-2-hydroxyglutarate oxidase; second gene in csiD-lhgO-gabDTP-csiR operon	LhgO is an L-2-hydroxyglutarate oxidase that is probably involved with recovering alpha-ketoglutarate (Kalliri, 2008). Repressed during biofilm formation.	b2660
sfmF	fimF(S.t.), ybcG	FimA homolog, function unknown	Putative structural component; Surface structures	FimA homolog	The sfmACDHF-sfmZ genes in centisome 12 are a remnant of a region that is orthologous to the Salmonella enterica fimA[I]CDHF-fim[WY]Z convergent operons also in centisome 12; both are adjacent to the argU tRNA gene; an ancestral sfmWYZ operon was apparently disrupted by the insertion of the DLP prophage, resulting in the loss of the sfmWY genes; fimI and STM05551 (between fimW and fimY) are specific to Salmonella. SfmF is one of 25 Fim homologs in E. coli K-12. The first 20 aa of SfmF are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b0534
nanC	yjhA	N-acetylnuraminic acid outer membrane channel protein	Null	N-acetylneuraminic acid outer membrane channel protein	In the absence of porins OmpF and OmpC (in an ompR mutant), NanC is required for the utilization of N-acetylneuraminic acid as a sole carbon source. NanC is regulated by N-acetylneuraminate through NagC and NanR. The first 23 aa of NanC are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b4311
ybfI'	None	pseudogene	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction, KdpE homolog	Full length KdpE is 225 amino acids. This degenerate gene fragment is homologous to the last 49 codons of kdpE. A stop codon at position 5 was translated as an X in the reconstruction.	b4636
ydiE	None	hemin uptake protein HemP homolog	Null	Hemin uptake protein HemP homolog; function unknown	Fur regulon.	b1705
dauA	ychM	C4-dicarboxylic acid transporter	Null	C4-dicarboxylic acid transporter at low pH; STAS domain	DauA is a C4-dicarboxylic acid transporter with a STAS domain that may be a dicarboxylic acid sensor; DauA is primarily responsible for succinate and fumarate transport at pH 5; dauA mutants have lowered DctA activity at pH 7; previous reports suggesting DauA(YchM) may be a bicarbonate transporter were disputed as no DauA-dependent bicarbonate accumulation could be detected; the substrate specificity of DctA and DauA differ (Karinou, 2012). dauA(ychM) mutants are synthetic lethal with fabBDHGAI, are alkali-sensitive, and appear to have impaired bicarbonate incorporation in the presence of NaCl; DauA(YchM) co-purifies with fatty acid metabolism enzymes; (Babu, 2010). Induced during biofilm formation.	b1206
ttdT	ygjC, ygjE	L-tartrate/succinate antiporte	Null	L-tartrate/succinate antiporter; needed for L-tatrate uptake and tartrate induction of ttdAB	TtdT does not transport D-tartrate and can uptake succinate, although excretion of succinate is favored. IT (Ion Transporter) superfamily (Prakash, 2003). TtdT is a member of the ST(3) structural class based on hydropathy profiles (Lolkema, 2003). YgjE was mistakenly identified as both YgjE and YgiE in the abstract for Oshima (2006), and thus ygiE is listed as a synonym for ygjE in TCDB. The real YgiE is now called ZupT.	b3063
msrB	yeaA	methionine sulfoxide reductase B	Null	Methionine sulfoxide reductase B; specific for met-R-(o) diastereoisomers within proteins; mutant is cadmium sensitive; free met-R-(o) is inefficiently reduced by MsrB	MsrB tightly binds zinc and iron (Sevcenco, 2014). mrsB mutants are cadmium sensitive (Grimaud, 2001). The msrB-gapAyeaD divergent operon promoter region binds FNR and msrB expression is repressed by FNR (Federowicz, 2014).	b1778
ybgE	None	putative inner membrane protein in cydABX-ybgE operon	Null	Putative inner membrane protein, in cydABX-ybgE operon	YbgE is not required for cytochrome bd-I activity (Vanorsdel, 2013). YbgE is the prototype for the Pfam profile PF09600. YbgE gives an ambiguous lipoprotein prediction, the Cys is somewhat conserved but has no LipoP or PATOSEQ predictions. YbgE is predicted to have three transmembrane helices with a cytoplasmic N-terminus topology.	b0735
yegE	None	putative diguanylate cyclase	Putative regulator; Not classified	Predicted diguanylate cyclase, dual domain protein; defective phosphodiesterase domain; predicted membrane sensor protein	A yegE null mutation partially suppresses the motility defect of a yhjH mutation; yegE partial suppression is best at 28C, full yhjH suppression requires yegE and yedQ mutations; a yeaJ null mutation is a better yhjH suppressor at 37C; full yhjH suppression requires yegE, yedQ and yeaJ null mutations when grown at 37C (Pesavento, 2008). The motility defect of yhjH mutations is suppressed by multicopy yfgF and by mutations in ycgR, fliZ, yfiR, yegE, crfC(yjdA) and yjcZ (Girgis, 2007). YegE has an N-terminal MASE1 domain followed by three PAS-PAC domain pairs, then a diguanylate cyclase GGDEF domain, followed by a defective C-terminal cyclic-di-GMP phosphodiesterase domain. RpoS regulon (Pesavento, 2008).	b2067
ycbF	None	putative periplasmic pilin chaperone	Putative factor; Surface structures	Putative periplasmic pilus chaperone, function unknown	YcbF has Ig-like domains: pfam PF00345 aligns to N-terminal residues 27-150, and pfam PF02753 aligns to C-terminal residues 231-155. First 26 aa are a predicted type I signal peptide.	b0944
dhaM	dhaH, ptsD, ycgC	putative dihydroxyacetone-specific PTS enzymes: HPr, EI components	Null	Multidomain dihydroxyacetone-specific PTS protein; phosphoryl donor for dihydroxyacetone kinase; DhaK(2):DhaL:DhaM(2) complex	DhaM is phosphorylated by PTS proteins HPr and Protein I. DhaM contains homology to HPr and part of Enzyme I. DhaM lacks a homologous PEP binding site and catalytic region of HPr. The N-terminal dimerization domain is homologous to an EIIa domain and is the phosphate donor region. H431 accepts phosphate from HPr and relays it to H10 and H170.	b1198
mdtK	norE, norM, ydhE	multidrug efflux system transporter	Putative transport; Not classified	Multidrug resistance efflux protein; overexpression resistance to norfloxacin, acriflavine, deoxycholate, trimethoprim	An mdtK(norM) plasmid confers resistance to norfloxacin, ciprofloxacin, and acriflavine, and the tetraphenylphosphonium ion; some increase in kanamycin and streptomycin resistance was also observed (Morita, 1998). An mdtK(ydhE) plasmid confers resistance to chloramphenicol, norfloxacin, enoxacin, fosfomycin, doxorubicin, trimethoprim, ethidium bromide, benzalkonium, tetraphenylphosphonium bromide, SDS, and deoxycholate (Nishino, 2001). An mdtK(ydhE) plasmid confers resistance to norfloxacin and ethidium bromide and these cells have reduced cellular concentrations of norfloxacin and ethidium bromide (Long, 2008). An mdtK(ydhE) plasmid confers resistance to ethidium bromide, enoxacin, ciprofloxacin, rhodamine 6G, acriflavine, crystal violet, norfloxacin, doxorubicin, novobiocin, berberine, benzalkonium, and tetraphenylphosphonium chloride (Long, 2008). YdhE binds to rhodamine 6G with a KD of 3 microM and also binds to ethidium bromide, proflavine, ciprofloxacin, and norfloxacin with KDs of 10 microM, 22 microM, 90 microM, and 98 microM, respectively (Long, 2008). An mdtK(norM) plasmid reduces the level of intracellular reactive oxygen species and presumably can export byproducts of bacterial metabolism that oxidize guanine (Guelfo, 2012). Over-expression of MdtK(NorE) confers resistance to growth inhibitory dipeptides, such as Ala-Gln, reducing their intracellular concentration (Hayashi, 2010). MATE family.	b1663
rlmN	yfgB	dual specificity 23S rRNA m(2)A2503, tRNA m(2)A37 methyltransferase, SAM-dependent	Enzyme; rRNA modification	23S rRNA m(2)A2503, tRNA m(2)A37 methyltransferase, SAM-dependent; dual specificity	RlmN is a dual specificity methyltransferase responsible for the m(2)A37 methylation of tRNAs as well as the 23S rRNA m(2)A2503 methylation for which it was named (Benítez-Páez, 2012). tRNAs with m(2)A37 include tRNAs charged with Arg, Asp, Gln, Glu and His (Czerwoniec, 2009). Radical SAM superfamily. RlmN is homologous to the cfr chloramphenicol resistance gene on plasmid pSCFS1 from Staphylococcus sciuri (Schwarz, 2000). YfgB is RlmN; rlmN- is twofold more sensitive to tiamulin, hygromycin A, and sparsomycin; although growth is not obviously impaired, wildtype outcompetes rlmN- (Toh, 2008).	b2517
chaB	None	cation transport regulator	Regulator; Transport of small molecules: Cations	Accessory and regulatory protein for chaA	Null	b1217
chaC	None	cation transport regulator	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Cations	Accessory and regulatory protein for chaA	Null	b1218
ychN	None	putative sulfur relay protein	Null	Predicted sulfur relay protein; dimer of trimers	YchN forms a homohexameric dimer of trimers (Shin, 2002). YchN is a predicted sulfur relay for intracellular sulfur reduction since paralogs TusB and TusD form a heterohexameric dimer of heterotrimers with TusB that is a sulfur relay system for tRNA modification that is structurally similar to YchN (Numata, 2006). TusB, TusD and YchN are paralogs of the Pfam PF02635 family.	b1219
ychO	ychP	putative invasin	Putative factor; Not classified	Intimin/invasin homolog	Extension based on homology to S. typhimurium SinH. YchO has a 24 aa signal peptide predicted.	b1220
ybiH	None	DUF1956 domain-containing tetR family putative transcriptional regulator	Putative regulator; Not classified	Putative transcriptional regulator of the ybiHybhGFSR operon; TetR family	TetR family. YbiH may be a repressor for the putative ybiHybhGFSR operon, which encodes the YbhG putative membrane fusion protein of efflux pumps and predicted ABC transporter proteins.	b0796
iaaA	spt, ybiK	Isoaspartyl peptidase 	Orf; Not classified	isoAsp aminopeptidase, cleaves isoAsp-X dipeptides; Ntn hydrolase; glutathione utilization; weak L-asparaginase activity in vitro (EcAIII); precursor is cleaved into an alpha and beta subunit; heterotetrameric	IaaA is cleaved before Thr179 to expose an N-terminal nucleophile and to produce two subunits. CysB regulon, sensitive to cysteine repression. Start of Salmonella iaaA is confirmed by N-terminal sequencing of IaaA precursor. Salmonella IaaA has been shown to have isoaspartyl-tripeptidase activity also; E. coli probably also has tripeptidase activity. iaaA is a non-essential gene. 	b0828
aegA	yffG	putative oxidoreductase, FeS binding subunit/NAD/FAD-binding subunit	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Predicted oxidoreductase, Fe-S subunit; induced by anaerobiosis, repressed by NO3; ygfT paralog	Null	b2468
nudK	yffH	GDP-mannose pyrophosphatase	Null	GDP-mannose pyrophosphatase	NudK is not involved in biofilm formation (Boto, 2011). 4/38 Udk peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed (Maillet, 2007).	b2467
rfbD	rmlD	dTDP-L-rhamnose synthase, NAD(P)-dependent dTDP-4-dehydrorhamnose reductase subunit	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Sugar-nucleotide biosynthesis, conversions	dTDP-L-rhamnose synthase	Null	b2040
rfbB	rmlB, som	dTDP-glucose 4,6 dehydratase, NAD(P)-binding	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Sugar-nucleotide biosynthesis, conversions	TDP-glucose oxidoreductase-4,6 dehydratase	Null	b2041
intS	intC, yfdB	CPS-53 (KpLE1) prophage; putative prophage CPS-53 integrase	Phage or Prophage Related	Integrase, CPS-53/KpLE1 prophage	Null	b2349
gatA	None	galactitol-specific enzyme IIA component of PTS	Enzyme; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	Galactitol-specific PTS system EIIA component	7/47 GatA peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is not removed (Maillet, 2007).	b2094
gatB	None	galactitol-specific enzyme IIB component of PTS	Enzyme; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	Galactitol-specific PTS system EIIB component	Null	b2093
gatC'	None	pseudogene, galactitol-specific enzyme IIC component of PTS	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	Pseudogene reconstruction, galactitol-specific PTS system EIIC component	The gatC pseudogene in MG1655(Seq) is a lab mutation with a frameshift mutation (insertion of CC at codon 305) acquired during the genome sequencing process; the parental MG1655 strain has an intact gatC gene (Freddolino, 2012). The CC at codon 305 has been removed in the gatC pseudogene reconstruction displayed by the DNA button; the protein tab displays the reconstructed GatC protein sequence. The DNA tab shows the unreconstructed genomic DNA sequence for gatC'.	b2092
gatD	None	galactitol-1-phosphate dehydrogenase, Zn-dependent and NAD(P)-binding	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Galactitol-1-phosphate dehydrogenase	Null	b2091
gatZ	None	D-tagatose 1,6-bisphosphate aldolase 2, subunit	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Tagatose bisphosphate aldolase GatYZ subunit; required for full activity and stability of GatY	Null	b2095
gatY	yegF	D-tagatose 1,6-bisphosphate aldolase 2, catalytic subunit	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	D-tagatose-1,6-bisphosphate aldolase, class II; requires GatZ subunit for full activity and stability	GatY is down 6X during growth at 4C (enabled by Oleispira antarctica Cpn10/60 transgene). kbaY, gatY, fbaA and ydjI are paralogs. Crp activated.	b2096
yfdC	None	inner membrane protein	Putative transport; Not classified	Uncharacterized protein	Null	b2347
ybiI	None	DksA-type zinc finger protein	Null	DksA-type zinc finger protein, function unknown	dksA and ybiI are paralogs.	b0803
ybiJ	None	DUF1471 family putative periplasmic protein	Null	DUF1471 family predicted periplasmic protein	A ybiJ deletion mutant in E. coli CFT073 has reduced motility and altered biofilm formation (Hancock, 2010). The first 22 aa of YbiJ are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b0802
tauD	ssiD, yaiG	taurine dioxygenase, 2-oxoglutarate-dependent	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Taurine/alpha-ketoglutarate dioxygenase	Null	b0368
prmC	hemK	RF-1 and RF-2 N5-glutamine methyltransferase	Putative enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Heme, porphyrin	Release factor (RF1, RF2) glutamine methyltransferase	The poor growth of a prmC(hemK) deletion is due to the A246T prmC(hemK) mutation present only in K-12 strains (Heurgué-Hamard, 2002; Dreyfus, 2011). Presumably the poor growth of a K-12 prmC(hemK) deletion mutant could also be alleviated by repairing the stop codon mutation in the rpsG gene of K-12 (Dreyfus, 2011). prmC(hemK) was originally isolated as a suppressor of the light sensitivity of hemH, now likely to be an indirect effect.	b1212
ogrK	None	orphan Ogr protein, positive regulator of P2 growth	Phage or Prophage Related	Positive regulator of P2 growth (insertion of P2 ogr gene)	Null	b2082
modA	None	molybdate ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein; chlorate resistance protein	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Anions	Molybdate ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein; chlorate resistance 	Flagellar regulon. The modA gene can be transcribed in vitro with sigma28 (FliA) holoenzyme (Yu, 2006).	b0763
tomB	ybaJ	Hha toxicity attenuator; conjugation-related protein	Null	Attenuates Hha toxicity, possibly by blocking activation of prophage lytic genes; promotes conjugation and conjugation-induced biofilms; deceases motility in presence of a conjugative plasmid (R1drd19)	Induced during biofilm formation. A mutant increases flagellar gene expression, via a twofold FlhD elevation.	b0461
puuR	ycjC	repressor for the divergent puu operons, putrescine inducible	Regulator; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Repressor for the divergent puu operons, putrescine inducible; putrescine utilization pathway	PuuR binds the puuA and puuD promoter regions in vitro and PuuR repressor binding is diminished by increasing the putrescine concentration (Nemoto, 2012). PuuR has an N-terminal HTH_3 DNA-binding domain (Pfam PF13560) and C-terminal Cupin_2 domain (Pfam PF07883).	b1299
ydiF	None	putative acetyl-CoA:acetoacetyl-CoA transferase: alpha subunit/beta subunit	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Short-chain acyl-CoA transferase, in vivo function unknown	Family I CoA transferase.	b1694
rluB	yciL	23S rRNA pseudouridine(2605) synthase	Enzyme; rRNA modification	23S rRNA pseudouridine(2605) synthase	 RluB is a ribosome-associated protein (Jiang, 2007).	b1269
ygiM	ecfG, htrG	SH3 domain protein	Null	SH3 domain protein, function unknown	YgiM has been detected as a membrane-bound homo-hexamer (Maddalo, 2011). The first 22 aa are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. IPR003646: SH3_bac family.	b3055
rseP	ecfE, yaeL	inner membrane zinc RIP metalloprotease; RpoE activator, by degrading RseA; cleaved signal peptide endoprotease	Null	Inner membrane zinc RIP metalloprotease; activates RpoE by degrading RseA; multicopy rpoE suppresses rseP mutation	RseP is involved in cleaved signal peptide degradation (Saito, 2011). RpoE regulon. RseP activates RpoE and releases membrane-bound RseA-RpoE complexes. Cleavage occurs around RseA membrane domain generating the N-terminal and the soluable product. rseP is an essential gene, but deletion of ompCF or ompCA (or an sRNA rseX clone, which suppresses ompCA translation) allows growth. RseP or some other protease degrades RseA in the released complexes. The RseA periplasmic domain must be first clipped or degraded by DegS before it is a substrate for RseP. RseP is related to the E. faecalis Eep protein involved in bacterial regulated intramembrane proteolysis (RIP). RseP has been topology mapped using protein fusions. RseP is reported to degrade RpoE and RpoH in vitro and to be an negative, not positive, effector of RpoE action in vivo, but the physiological relevance and/or accuracy of this has subsequently been strongly challenged (Dartigalongue, 2001).	b0176
menE	None	O-succinylbenzoate-CoA ligase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Menaquinone, ubiquinone	o-succinylbenzoate-CoA synthase; homotetrameric; menaquinone biosynthesis	Null	b2260
menH	yfbB	2-succinyl-6-hydroxy-2,4-cyclohexadiene-1-carboxylate synthase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Menaquinone, ubiquinone	SHCHC synthase, menaquinone biosynthesis; 2-succinyl-6-hydroxy-2,4-cyclohexadiene-1-carboxylate synthase	MenH(YfbB) has been classified as a predicted protease, MEROPS family S33.UPW, when it should probably be classified as a non-protease protease homolog. MenH(YfbB) has Acyl-CoA esterase in vitro (Kuznetsova, 2005).	b2263
yjfF	None	putative sugar ABC transporter permease	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative sugar ABC transporter permease; possible galactofuranse substrate	Null	b4231
mpl	tpl, yjfG	UDP-N-acetylmuramate:L-alanyl-gamma-D-glutamyl-meso-diaminopimelate ligase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	UDP-N-acetylmuramate:L-alanyl-gamma-D-glutamyl-meso-diaminopimelate ligase; recycles cell wall peptidoglycan	RpoS regulon.	b4233
yfjD	corB(S.t.), corF(S.t.), ypjE	UPF0053 family inner membrane protein	Null	Inner membrane protein, UPF0053 family, function unknown; four transmembrane helices predicted; possibly involved in Co2+ resistance	corB and corF were previously thought to be two separate genes in Salmonella due to a sequencing mistake (in Genbank AF130857). The role of YfjD in E. coli has not been determined. The predicted CTG start codon for yfjD has been confirmed by start codon mutagenesis (D. Dague and K.E. Rudd, unpublished).	b4461
yggL	None	DUF469 family protein	Null	DUF469 family protein, function unknown	Pfam PF04320 DUF469 family.	b2959
ycfJ	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Putative periplasmic protein, UmoD homolog	YcfJ is homologous to UmoD (P.m.), which upregulates flhDC in P. mirabilis. The first 23 residues of YcfJ are predicted to be a cleaved signal peptide.	b1110
eamB	yfiK	cysteine and O-acetylserine exporter	Null	Cysteine and O-acetylserine exporter, inner membrane protein	eamB(yfiK) is induced by hydrogen peroxide and cysteine (Ohtsu, 2010). LysE, RhtB family.	b2578
yfiL	None	lipoprotein	Null	DUF2799 family verified lipoprotein, function unknown	The first 16 aa of YfiL are a type II signal peptide.	b2602
speG	None	spermidine N(1)-acetyltransferase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Polyamine biosynthesis	Spermidine N(1)-acetyltransferase	Null	b1584
ybcH	None	PRK09936 family protein	Null	PRK09936 family protein, function unknown	The first 20 aa of YbcH are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b0567
prmB	yfcB	N5-glutamine methyltransferase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	50S subunit L3 protein glutamine methyltransferase	2/46 peptide masses from MS analysis indicate that an upstream start codon is utilized, but the upstream sequences are not conserved (Maillet, 2007).	b2330
norW	ygaL, ygbD	NADH:flavorubredoxin oxidoreductase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	NADH:flavoruberedoxin reductase	Upregulated by GSNO in defined medium (anaerobic).	b2711
rspA	None	bifunctional D-altronate/D-mannonate dehydratase	Phenotype; Global regulatory functions	Bifunctional D-altronate/D-mannonate dehydratase; overproduction prevents homoserine lactone-induced synthesis of RpoS	Overproduced RspA may degrade HSL. Starvation induced. 	b1581
rspB	None	putative Zn-dependent NAD(P)-binding oxidoreductase	Enzyme; Global regulatory functions	Function unknown, transcribed with rspA, starvation induced	Null	b1580
rraB	yjgD	protein inhibitor of RNase E	Null	Protein inhibitor of RNase E	Null	b4255
ybaK	proX	Cys-tRNA(Pro)/Cys-tRNA(Cys) deacylase	Null	Cys-tRNA(Pro)/Cys-tRNA(Cys) deacylase, tRNA editing	YbaK has weak in vitro deacylase activity against Gly-, Ala-, Ser- Pro- and Met-tRNAs. YbaK is homologous to YeaK and an insertion domain in ProS. ybaK is a non-essential gene; YbaK is a low abundance protein. otherPDB (H. influenzae): 1DBU, 1DBX.	b0481
lplT	ygeD	lysophospholipid transporter	Orf; Drug/analog sensitivity	Lysophospholipid transporter	Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS).	b2835
gadC	acsA, xasA	glutamate:gamma-aminobutyric acid antiporter	Putative transport; Not classified	Glutamate-GABA antiporter; glutamate-dependent enzyme, may function in protection against cytoplasmic acidification	GlsA and GadC form an acid resistance system sufficient to protect E. coli from acid stress in the pressence of glutamine (Lu, 2013). The crystal structure and functional characterization of the E. coli O157:H7 glutamate-gamma-aminobutyric acid antiporter GadC was determined and is identical in sequence to the K-12 enzyme (Ma, 2012). EvgAS regulon.	b1492
ydgA	None	DUF945 family protein	Null	DUF945 family protein required for swarming	HT_Cmplx48_Mem: SecA+YdgA+YjiY. YdgA is required for swarming motility (Inoue, 2007). YdgA has a predicted signal anchor.	b1614
alsB	yjcX	D-allose ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein	Putative regulator; Not classified	D-allose-binding protein, periplasmic	The first 23 aa of AlsB are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. HT_Cmplx28_Mem: AlsB+RbsB.	b4088
alsR	rpiR, yjcY	d-allose-inducible als operon transcriptional repressor; autorepressor; repressor of rpiR	Regulator; Central intermediary metabolism: Non-oxidative branch, pentose pathway	Repressor for als operon and rpiB; D-allose-inducible; autorepressor	RpiR is paralogous to YfeT and has HTH and SIS phosphosugar binding domains.	b4089
yjcZ	None	YjcZ family protein; yhjH motility defect suppressor	Null	Mutational suppressor of yhjH motility defect; function unknown	The motility defect of yhjH mutations is suppressed by multicopy yfgF and by mutations in ycgR, fliZ, yfiR, yegE, crfC(yjdA), and yjcZ (Girgis, 2007). crfC(yjdA)-yjcZ are predicted to constitute an operon.	b4110
adiC	aniC(S.t.), yjdD, yjdE	arginine:agmatine antiporter	Putative transport; Not classified	Arginine:agmatine antiporter; arginine-dependent acid resistance; acid-inducible membrane protein	Arg/Agm exchange by Salmonella AdiC in an in vitro reconstituted system was found to be Arg(+)/Agm(2+) exchange, supporting proton pumping (Tsai, 2012; Tsai, 2013). The Salmonella ortholog AniC is induced by anaerobiosis and acid. OtherPDB(S. typhimurium): 3HQK (Lü, 2012). The E. coli AdiC structures (PDB:3H6B,3H5M) are from strain O157:H7 and are 100% identical to the K-12 AdiC sequence (Gao, 2009). EvgAS regulon.	b4115
yjdF	None	DUF2238 family inner membrane protein	Null	Function unknown	Null	b4121
dcuR	yjdG	response regulator in two-component regulatory system with DcuS	Putative regulator; Not classified	Response regulator for C4-dicarboxylate; two-component system regulation of anaerobic fumurate respiratory system	dcuSR operon is repressed by nitrate via the NarXL system.	b4124
dcuS	yjdH	sensory histidine kinase in two-component regulatory system with DcuR, regulator of anaerobic fumarate respiration	Putative regulator; Not classified	Histidine protein kinase sensor for C4-dicarboxylate; two-component system regulation of anaerobic fumurate respiratory system	dcuSR operon is repressed by nitrate via the NarXL system.	b4125
yjdI	None	putative 4Fe-4S mono-cluster protein	Null	Predicted divergent 4Fe-4S mono-cluster protein	PF06902 formerly described the DUF1271 family but now has been renamed as Fer4_19.	b4126
yjdJ	None	GNAT family putative N-acetyltransferase	Null	GNAT family putative N-acetyltransferase	Null	b4127
ghoS	yjdK	antitoxin of GhoTS toxin-antitoxin pair; endonuclease for ghoT mRNA	Null	Antitoxin of GhoTS toxin-antitoxin pair; endonuclease for ghoT mRNA	The GhoT(YjdO) toxin is a membrane-lytic protein that produces 60% non-viable ghost cells when overproduced and increases the formation of persister cells among the survivors; the GhoST toxin-antitoxin pair is proposed to define a new class of TA pairs, named type V, because the GhoS(YjdK) antitoxin is an RNase that cleaves the toxin mRNA; in addition to cleaving ghoT mRNA, 20 mRNAs encoding proteins involved in biosynthesis or transport of purines or pyrimidines are also apparently degraded by GhoS; the NMR structure of GhoS (PDB:2LLZ) resembles the Cas2 RNase of the CRISPR system (Wang, 2012; Van Melderen, 2012). Toxin endoribonuclease MqsR degrades ghoS antitoxin mRNA but not ghoT toxin mRNA, amplifying the GhoT toxin production as a stress response (Wang, 2013). MqsR induction increases GhoT production; GhoT is localized to poles and does not cause cell lysis during normal physiology but does impair membrane function, causing a reduction of cellular ATP and PMF energy sources, a lowered metabolism, and an increase in the number of persistent (dormant) cells formed in the presence of antibiotics (Cheng, 2013).	b4128
dtpC	dtpC, yjdL	dipeptide and tripeptide permease	Transport; Not classified	Dipeptide and tripeptide permease C	DtpC(YjdL) preferentially binds dipeptides over tripeptides, distinguishing it from its DtpABD paralogs (Ernst, 2009). YjdL has been renamed as DtpC (Casagrande, 2009). Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS).	b4130
yjeH	None	putative transporter	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative transporter, function unknown	A yjeH mutant of Salmonella has reduced ceftriaxone resistance and altered OM protein levels (Hu, 2007).	b4141
yjeI	None	DUF4156 family lipoprotein	Null	DUF4156 family lipoprotein, function unknown	The first 18 aa of YjeI are a type II signal peptide.	b4144
yjeJ	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Function unknown	Null	b4145
epmB	yjeK	EF-P-Lys34 lysylation protein; weak lysine 2,3-aminomutase	Enzyme; Protein modification	Required for lysylation of EF-P Lys34; weak lysine 2,3-aminomutase activity; required for EF-P-mediated translation of polyprolines	EpmA(YjeA) and EpmB(YjeK) are required to modify EF-P Lys34 by lysylation of the epsilon amino group; failure to modify EF-P with lysine results in a slow growth defect; EpmB(YjeK) may convert alpha-lysyl-EF-P to beta-lysyl-EF-P (Yanagisawa, 2010). Efficient translation of polyproline-containing proteins is the function of EF-P and requires the EpmAB-mediated lysine34 lysylation (Doerfel, 2012; Ude, 2012). A third and final EF-P post-translation modification enzyme EpmC(YfcM) is identified as EF-P-Lys34 hydroxylase; EpmC(YfcM) acts after beta-lysinylation of Lys34 by EpmA(YjeA) and EpmB(YjeK); EpmC(YfcM) adds an oxygen atom to the C5 position of Lys34 and does not modify the added beta-lysine; YjeA and YjeK were renamed as EpmA and EpmB, respectively (Peil, 2012). EpmA(YjeA) and EpmB(YjeK) were predicted to be responsible for the modification of EF-P Lys34 with spermidine, but Lys34 is actually modified with another lysine, not spermidine; epmB(yjeK) is in the efp genetic neighborhood in many strains and all genomes that have the conserved Lys34 in EF-P have epmB(yjeK) orthologs; EpmB(YjeK) is a lysine 2,3-aminomutase homolog (but in a different clade) (Bailly, 2010; Yanagisawa, 2010). EpmB(YjeK) is a homolog of Clostridium subterminale KamA and has weak lysine 2,3-aminomutase activity, but its specific activity is only 0.1% of that of KamA and produces a slightly different product, indicating this may not be a physiologically relevant activity in E. coli (Behshad, 2006). Radical SAM superfamily.	b4146
blc	yjeL	outer membrane lipoprotein cell division and growth lipocalin	Membrane; Macromolecule synthesis, modification: Lipoprotein	Outer membrane lipoprotein, cell division and growth function; monomeric; prokaryotic lipocalin	RpoS regulon. The first 18 aa of Blc are a type II signal peptide.	b4149
yjeM	None	putative transporter	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative transporter, function unknown	Null	b4156
yjeN	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Function unknown	Null	b4157
yjeO	None	inner membrane protein	Null	Inner membrane protein, function unknown	Null	b4158
mscM	yjeP	mechanosensitive channel protein, miniconductance	Transport; ions	Mechanosensitive channel protein, miniconductance	MscM(YjeP) was found to be the protein responsible for the previously observed MscM mechanosensitive channel activity with miniconductance (Edwards, 2012). Although YbdG also has miniconductance-type mechanosensitive channel activity, it is not expressed well, requires a mutation to observe gating in vitro, and thus its gene name has been changed back to ybdG. mscS, mscK(kefA), mscM(yjeP), ybiO, ybdG and ynaI are paralogs in the MscS family.	b4159
rsgA	engC, yjeQ	ribosome small subunit-dependent GTPase A	Null	Ribosome-stimulated GTPase, 30S subunit assemby; low adundance protein; putative RNA binding protein	An rsgA mutant is resistant to high salt stress (Hase, 2009). rsgA(yjeQ) has been reported to be an essential gene, but deletion mutants have also been reported to grow slowly. RsgA:ribosomes is 1:200 in vivo. Guanine nucleotide-dependent 30S subunit binding greatly stimulates GTPase activity. OtherPDB (S.typhimurium):2RCN. OtherPDB (S.typhimurium):4A21.	b4161
orn	yjeR	oligoribonuclease	Null	3' to 5' oligoribonuclease; mutants accumulate oligoribonucleotides that are 2-5 residues long	orn has been shown to be an essential gene (Ghosh, 1999; Baba, 2007). orn has been misclassified as a non-essential gene based the presence of insertions in a on global mutagenesis (Gerdes, 2003).	b4162
queG	yjeS	epoxyqueuosine reductase, cobalamine-stimulated; queosine biosynthesis	Enzyme; cofactor biosynthesis	Epoxyqueuosine reductase, cobalamine-stimulated; queuosine biosynthesis	The queuosine (Q) biosynthesis enzyme QueG(YjeS) epoxyqueuosine (oQ) reductase requires a reductant and a redox mediator and is stimulated by cobalamine; a queG mutant accumulates oQ and lacks Q (Miles, 2011). Queuosine (Q) is a hypermodified base found in the wobble positions of tRNA Asp, Asn, His, and Tyr. QueG(YjeS) protein expression is detected and it can be downregulated by an opposing DnaA-represssed transcript within the overlapping DnaA protein titration locus DatA (Kitagawa, 1996). QueG(YjeS) has an iron-sulfur center.	b4166
yjeT	None	DUF2065 family protein	Null	DUF2065 family protein	The yjeT promoter region binds FNR and yjeT expression is activated by FNR (Federowicz, 2014).	b4176
rlmB	yjfH	23S rRNA mG2251 2'-O-ribose methyltransferase, SAM-dependent	Enzyme; rRNA modification	23S rRNA mG2251 2'-O-ribose methyltransferase, SAM-dependent	rlmB is non-essential. 6/83 RlmB(YjfH) peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed (Maillet, 2007).	b4180
yjfI	None	DUF2170 family protein 	Null	DUF2170 family protein	Null	b4181
yjfJ	None	PspA/IM30 family protein	Phenotype; Not classified	Function unknown, PspA/IM30 family	Null	b4182
yjfK	None	DUF2491 family protein	Null	DUF2491 family protein	Null	b4183
yjfL	None	UPF0719 family inner membrane protein	Null	Inner membrane protein, UPF0719 family, function unknown	Null	b4184
yjfM	None	DUF1190 family protein	Null	DUF1190 family protein, function unknown; helps mitigate tolC mutant defects	A mutant lacking ygiB, ygiC, yjfM, yjfC, and tolC has an exacerbated growth defect in mimimal medium and has increased antibiotic sensitivities relative to tolC-alone mutants; the phenotypic defects of the five gene deletion strain are complemented by a tolC plasmid; both the ygiBC and yjfMC deletions are needed to exacerbate the tolC phenotype indicating that YgiBC and YjfMC may have redundant functions; it is not known if all four genes need to be deleted to observe the tolC mutant phenotype exacerbations (Dhamdhere, 2010).	b4185
bsmA	yjfO	bioflm peroxide resistance protein	Null	Confers peroxide resistance in bioflms, YhcN family; mutants are hypermotile on soft agar; probable lipoprotein, function unknown; Cys conserved	The first 24 aa of BsmA are a predicted type II signal peptide. YjfO is the only one of ten YhcN paralogs that is predicted to have a type II signal peptide; the others have type I signals predicted or verified.	b4189
yjfP	None	acyl CoA esterase	Null	Acyl CoA esterase activity in vitro, function unknown	S9 peptidase family.	b4190
ulaR	yjfQ	transcriptional repressor for the L-ascorbate utilization divergent operon	Putative regulator; Not classified	Repressor for the L-ascorbate utilization (ula) divergent operon; L-ascorbate-6-P inducible	The divergent ulaG-ulaABCDEF operon is repressed by UlaR(YjfQ) looping and is induced by L-ascorbate in the medium, which is converted to the molecular inducer L-ascorbate-6-P during import by the PTS system; the Gene Ontology molecular function GO:0031418 (L-ascorbate binding) assigned to UlaR may not be strictly correct since L-ascorbate does not affect in vitro binding of UlaR to its operators; it is L-ascorbate-6-P that binds directly to UlaR, releasing UlaR from the operator DNA (Campos, 2002; Zhang, 2003; Campos, 2004; Garces, 2008). The constitutive promoter for UlaR has not been mapped, and a Northern blot of the ulaG mRNA has not been performed, but since induction of ulaG by ascorbate addition or ulaR mutation does not increase expression of a ulaR-lacZ fusion there probably is a transcription terminator preceding the UlaR promoter in the 107 bp ulaG-ulaR intergenic regiom; the ulaR promoter (RpoE class) with a +1 in the ulaG stop codon, predicted at RegulonDB, does not meet this criterion (Campos, 2002; Campos, 2004; Huerta, 2003). There is a potential Rho-independent terminator ending about 40 nt past ulaG (K.E.R.). UlaR has an N-terminal DeoR-like HTH DNA binding domain (PF08220) and a C-terminal DeoR-like inducer binding and dimerization sensor domain (PF00455), the latter domain family being derived from a catalytically inactive version of the ISOCOT fold (Anantharam, 2006). 	b4191
ulaG	yjfR	L-ascorbate 6-phosphate lactonase	Null	L-ascorbate-6-phosphate lactonase; involved in the utilization of L-ascorbate by anaerobic fermentation; phosphodiesterase activity	UlaG was predicted to be L-ascorbate-6-phosphate lactonase (Zhang, 2003). Purified UlaG has in vitro L-ascorbate-6-phosphate lactonase activity (Garces, 2010). UlaG has phosphodiesterase activity with model substrate bis-pNPP (Kuznetsova, 2005). An early pathway proposed for L-ascorbate catabolism did not include a predicted function for the divergent ulaG gene, depicting a spontaneous hydrolysis of L-ascorbate to 3-keto-L-gulonate outside the cell, but the authors also considered L-ascorbate import and phosphorylation via the PTS system followed by intracellular hydrolysis, as the pathway has since been shown to be (Yew, 2002). Spontaneous hydrolysis of L-ascorbate directly to 3-keto-L-gulonate is slow, but L-ascorbate metabolism in animals can proceed by nonenzymatic oxidation to dehydroascorbate, an unstable lactone that hydrolyzes spontaneously to 2,3-di-keto-l-gulonate (Zhang, 2003). 2,3-di-keto-l-gulonate is taken up directly by the YiaMNO TRAP transporter (Thomas, 2006). The divergent ulaG-ulaABCDEF operon is repressed by UlaR(YjfQ) looping and is induced by L-ascorbate in the medium, which is converted to the molecular inducer L-ascorbate-6-P during import by the PTS system (Campos, 2002; Zhang, 2003; Campos, 2004; Garces, 2008). The constitutive promoter for UlaR has not been mapped, and a Northern blot of the ulaG mRNA has not been performed, but since induction of ulaG by ascorbate addition or ulaR mutation does not increase expression of a ulaR-lacZ fusion there probably is a transcription terminator preceding the UlaR promoter in the 107 bp ulaG-ulaR intergenic regiom; the ulaR promoter (RpoE class) with a +1 in the ulaG stop codon, predicted at RegulonDB, does not meet this criterion (Campos, 2002; Campos, 2004; Huerta, 2003). There is a potential Rho-independent terminator ending about 40 nt past ulaG (K.E.R.).	b4192
ulaA	sgaT, yjfS	L-ascorbate-specific enzyme IIC permease component of PTS	Null	Ascorbate-specific PTS system EIIC permease component; L-ascorbate uptake	The divergent ulaG-ulaABCDEF operon is repressed by UlaR(YjfQ) looping and is induced by L-ascorbate in the medium, which is converted to the molecular inducer L-ascorbate-6-P during import by the PTS system (Campos, 2002; Zhang, 2003; Campos, 2004; Garces, 2008).	b4193
ulaB	sgaB, yjfT	L-ascorbate-specific enzyme IIB component of PTS	Null	Ascorbate-specific PTS system EIIB component; L-ascorbate uptake	The divergent ulaG-ulaABCDEF operon is repressed by UlaR(YjfQ) looping and is induced by L-ascorbate in the medium, which is converted to the molecular inducer L-ascorbate-6-P during import by the PTS system (Campos, 2002; Zhang, 2003; Campos, 2004; Garces, 2008).	b4194
ulaC	ptxA, sgaA, yjfU	L-ascorbate-specific enzyme IIA component of PTS	Putative transport; Not classified	Ascorbate-specific PTS system EIIA component; L-ascorbate uptake	The divergent ulaG-ulaABCDEF operon is repressed by UlaR(YjfQ) looping and is induced by L-ascorbate in the medium, which is converted to the molecular inducer L-ascorbate-6-P during import by the PTS system (Campos, 2002; Zhang, 2003; Campos, 2004; Garces, 2008).	b4195
ulaD	sgaH, yjfV	3-keto-L-gulonate 6-phosphate decarboxylase	Putative enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	3-keto-L-gulonate-6-phosphate decarboxylase; involved in the utilization of L-ascorbate by anaerobic fermentation; dimeric	The divergent ulaG-ulaABCDEF operon is repressed by UlaR(YjfQ) looping and is induced by L-ascorbate in the medium, which is converted to the molecular inducer L-ascorbate-6-P during import by the PTS system (Campos, 2002; Zhang, 2003; Campos, 2004; Garces, 2008).	b4196
ulaE	sgaU, yjfW	L-xylulose 5-phosphate 3-epimerase	Putative enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	L-xylulose 5-phosphate 3-epimerase; involved in the utilization of L-ascorbate by anaerobic fermentation	The divergent ulaG-ulaABCDEF operon is repressed by UlaR(YjfQ) looping and is induced by L-ascorbate in the medium, which is converted to the molecular inducer L-ascorbate-6-P during import by the PTS system (Campos, 2002; Zhang, 2003; Campos, 2004; Garces, 2008). The UlaE structures were determined for UlaE derived from E. coli O157:H7 strain EDL933 which differs from the K-12 UlaE at three amino acid positions (Shi, 2008).	b4197
ulaF	sgaE, yjfX	L-ribulose 5-phosphate 4-epimerase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	L-ribulose 5-phosphate 4-epimerase; involved in the utilization of L-ascorbate by anaerobic fermentation	The divergent ulaG-ulaABCDEF operon is repressed by UlaR(YjfQ) looping and is induced by L-ascorbate in the medium, which is converted to the molecular inducer L-ascorbate-6-P during import by the PTS system (Campos, 2002; Zhang, 2003; Campos, 2004; Garces, 2008).	b4198
yjfY	None	YhcN family protein, periplasmic	Null	DUF1471 family periplasmic protein, function unknown	The first 20 aa of YjfY are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b4199
yjfZ	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Function unknown	yjfZ and yjiC are paralogs and E. coli-only genes. They have different N-terminal domains.	b4204
ytfA'	None	pseudogene, related to transcriptional regulators	Null	Pseudogene, C-terminal fragment	Full length YtfA is found in many E. coli strains. Predicted transcriptional regulator, TetR Family. The first 82 codons of ytfA appear to have been deleted from E. coli K-12.	b4205
ytfB	None	OapA family protein	Null	OapA family protein, function unknown	Over-expression of cloned ytfB induces filamentation (Burke, 2013).	b4206
fklB	ytfC	FKBP-type peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase (rotamase)	Enzyme; Proteins - translation and modification	FKBP-type peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase; contains pipecolic acid residue	Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004). 7/84 peptide masses from MS analysis indicate that an upstream start codon is utilized, but this contradicts N-terminal sequencing data and the upstream sequences are not conserved (Maillet, 2007).	b4207
cycA	dagA, ytfD	D-alanine/D-serine/glycine transporter	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	D-alanine, beta-alanine, D-serine, glycine permease; D-cycloserine uptake	Null	b4208
ytfE	dnrN	iron-sulfur cluster repair protein RIC	Null	Iron-sulfur cluster repair protein; RIC; confers resistance to nitric oxide and hydrogen peroxide; di-iron center	ytfE is induced by NO as part of the NsrR regulon. YtfE can regenerate damaged AcnB and FumA in vitro (Justino, 2007). A ytfE mutant grows poorly under anaerobic respiratory conditions and has an increased sensitivity to iron starvation (Justino, 2006). The previously reported ytfE mutant strain has additional phenotypes due to secondary mutations resulting in the loss of 126 additional genes (Vine, 2010). ytfE is homologous to S. aureus scdA, which can complement a ytfE muation (Overton, 2008). ytfE expression is increased in fnr and fur mutants, but no obvious FNR or Fur binding sites were found.	b4209
ytfF	None	DMT transporter family inner membrane protein	Putative membrane; Not classified	Probable amino acid exporter, DUF6 family	Overexpression of ytfF partially reverses Ala-Ala sensitivity but alanine is probably not its physiologically relevant amino acid substrate(s) (Hori, 2011). YtfF belongs to the EamA/RhaT transporter family, DMT superfamily.	b4210
qorB	qor2, ytfG	NAD(P)H:quinone oxidoreductase	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Electron transport	Quinone oxidoreductase B, NADPH dependent; QOR2	Null	b4211
ytfH	None	DUF24 family HxlR-type putative transcriptional regulator	Null	Predicted transcriptional regulator, HxlR-type, DUF24 family; function unknown	Null	b4212
ytfI	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Function unknown	Null	b4215
ytfJ	ecfJ	putative transcriptional regulator	Null	Expressed periplasmic protein, function unknown	Overexpression causes filamentous biofilm formation.	b4216
ytfK	None	DUF1107 family protein	Null	DUF1107 family protein	PhoB regulon (Baek, 2006).	b4217
ytfL	None	UPF0053 family inner membrane protein	Putative transport; Not classified	Inner membrane protein, UPF0053 family, function unknown	Null	b4218
tamA	yftM, ytfM	translocation and assembly module for autotransporter export, outer membrane subunit	Transport; Not classified	Translocation and assembly module for autotransporter export; outer membrane subunit	TamA and TamB form a TAM complex required for secretion of the Ag43(Flu) autotransporter (Selkrig, 2012). tamA(ytfM) and bamA are paralogs. The verified 21 aa signal peptide of TamA is consistent with an observed SecB-dependent precursor cleavage that is blocked by azide (Marani, 2006). Predicted tamAB-ytfP operon. yftM is added as a synonym because it is a common mispelling of ytfM. Null tamA(ytfM) mutants do not have OM composition or integrity defects, but they do grow slowly (Stegmeier, 2007). TamA has a C-terminal beta-barrel OM protein domain and an N-terminal periplasmic domain.	b4220
tamB	ytfN, ytfO	translocation and assembly module for autotransporter export, inner membrane subunit	Transport; Not classified	Translocation and assembly module for autotransporter export; inner membrane subunit; required for outer membrane integrity	TamA and TamB form a TAM complex required for secretion of the Ag43(Flu) autotransporter (Selkrig, 2012). TamB has an uncleaved signal anchor as indicated by MS/MS sequencing confirming the uncleaved start site, and by inner membrane localization (Selkrig, 2012). TamB(YtfN) is needed for outer membrane integrity as evidenced by membrane blebbing after vancomycin treatment, antibiotic hypersensitivity, lowered outer membrane protein content and elevated levels of DegP (Babu, 2011). DUF490 family. Predicted tamAB-ytfP operon.	b4221
ytfP	None	GGCT-like protein	Null	Gamma-glutamyl cyclotransferase (GGCT) domain protein, function unknown	YtfP belongs to the GGCT-like domain family also called the AIG2-like family (Pfam PF06094). Predicted tamAB-ytfP operon. Similar to the N-terminus of B. subtilis YkqA, whose C-terminus is similar to ChaA.	b4222
ytfQ	None	galactofuranose ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein	Putative regulator; Not classified	Galactofuranose ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein	Galactofuranose was found bound to crystallized YtfQ and purified YtfQ binds galactose, presumably all in the furanose form (Horler, 2009). A 21 aa signal peptide is cleaved from YtfQ, as evidenced by MS MW of a processed protein (Horler, 2009).	b4227
ytfR	ytfS	putative sugar ABC transporter ATPase	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative sugar ABC transporter ATPase	Null	b4485
ytfT	None	putative sugar ABC transporter permease	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative sugar ABC transporter permease	Null	b4230
yjfN	None	DUF1471 family periplasmic protein	Null	DUF1471 family periplasmic protein, function unknown	The first 21 aa of YjfN are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. Cpx regulon.	b4188
garD	yhaG	D-galactarate dehydrogenase	Null	D-galactarate dehydratase; uxaA paralog; contains conserved CxxS redox motif	Null	b3128
nrdG	yjgE	anaerobic ribonucleotide reductase activating protein	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Nucleotide interconversions	Ribonucleotide reductase activase, generating glycyl radical; contains iron; binds NrdD tightly	FNR regulon. Radical SAM superfamily.	b4237
ridA	yjgF	enamine/imine deaminase, reaction intermediate detoxification	Null	Enamine/imine deaminase, reaction intermediate detoxification	The Salmonella RidA(YjgF) is an enamine and imine deaminase required for the removal of the two unstable, toxic, tautomeric reactive intermediates, aminocrotonate and iminobutyrate, which are produced during the IlvA-mediated, PLP-dependent threonine dehydratase reaction; producing 2-ketobutyrate and releasing ammonia in a hydrolysis reaction that may require catalysis, due either to the low water environment or immediate toxicity in the cell; IlvA also dehydrates serine to yield pyruvate via analogous enamine/imine intermediates, also removed by RidA (Lambrecht, 2012). The Salmonella RidA(YjgF) is required for full IlvE activity and for the dependence of the alternative pyrimidine biosynthesis (APB) pathway of thiamine biosynthesis upon the oxidative pentose phosphate pathway (Schmitz, 2004). RidA(YjgF), RutC, TdcF, YoaB and YjgH are paralogs and members of a highly conserved RidA(YjgF) family (pfam:PF01042) with diverse mutant phenotypes; the family members form homotrimers, some binding 2-ketoglutarate or related compounds, and are probably all reactive intermediate deaminases. The rat homolog PSP (perchloric acid-soluble protein) has been reported to have endoribonuclease activity, Endoribonuclease L, against ss mRNA, inhibiting translation, but the E. coli homologsd are not RNases. PF01042 family.	b4243
mgtA	corB, mgt	magnesium transporter	Enzyme; Transport of small molecules: Cations	Magnesium transporter, ATP-dependent; mutant has cobalt resistance; mediates Mg(2+) influx	Mg(2+) stimulon-PhoPQ regulon, EvgAS-PhoPQ cascade enhanced-expression subset. Salmonella mgtA is regulated by a Mg(2+)-responsive riboswitch which attenuates transcription; the mgtA 5' UTR secondary structure is conserved in E. coli and the E. coli mgtA 5' UTR functions as a Mg(2+)-responsive riboswitch in a synthetic construct (Groisman, 2006; Cromie, 2006). In addition to the PhoP-regulated P1 promoter, there is a constitutive P2 promoter 83 nt upstream of P1 (Kato, 1999; Yamamoto, 2002; Minagawa, 2003). The mgtA riboswitch senses external Mg(2+) levels and, in addition to an attenuation mechanism, targets mgtA mRNA for degradation by RNase E at high external Mg(2+) levels (Spinelli, 2008). HAD superfamily: MgtA contains a putative phosphatase HAD domain at residues 367-662.	b4242
yjgH	None	UPF0131 family protein	Null	Putative reactive intermediate deaminase, UPF0076 family; reaction intermediate detoxification	The Salmonella PF01042 family member RidA(YjgF) is an enamine/imine deaminase required for the detoxification of reactive intermediates of the PLP-dependent threonine dehydratase IlvA, releasing ammonia in a water-based reaction indicative of the low water environment of the cell (Lambrecht, 2012). RidA(YjgF), RutC, TdcF, YoaB and YjgH are paralogs and members of a highly conserved RidA(YjgF) family (pfam:PF01042) with diverse mutant phenotypes; the family members form homotrimers, some binding 2-ketoglutarate or related compounds, and all are probably reactive intermediate deaminases. The rat homolog PSP (perchloric acid-soluble protein) has been reported to have endoribonuclease activity, Endoribonuclease L, against ss mRNA, inhibiting translation.	b4248
bdcA	yjgI	c-di-GMP-binding biofilm dispersal mediator protein	Regulator; Not classified	c-di-GMP-binding biofilm dispersal mediator protein	BdcA binds c-di-GMP, reducing free c-di-GMP and causing biofilm dispersal; BdcA does not degrade c-di-GMP; a E50Q mutation increases c-di-GMP binding and increases biofilm dispersal (Ma, 2011). The divergent BdcR is a transcriptional repressor for the bdcA gene (Ma, 2011). COG1028 family	b4249
bdcR	yjgJ	transcriptional repressor for divergent bdcA	Regulator; Not classified	Transcriptional repressor for divergent bdcA	TetR family.	b4251
tabA	yjgK	biofilm modulator regulated by toxins; DUF386 family protein, cupin superfamily protein	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Biofilm modulator regulated by toxins; DUF386 family protein, cupin superfamily	tabA(yjgK) is uniquely induced (3X) in a strain lacking five toxin-antitoxin modules (Kim, 2009). EbgC is a distant homolog of YiaL, YhcH and TabA(YjgK), all four match PF04074; although homologous to the beta subunit of the EbgAC evolved beta-galactosidase, no potential EbgA-like alpha subunit partners are apparent for the other three DUF386 family proteins. tabA(yjgK) is predicted to be in the KdgR regulon due to a strong match to the consensus KdgR binding site in its promoter region.	b4252
yjgL	None	SopA-central-domain-like hexapeptide repeat protein	Null	SopA-central-domain-like hexapeptide repeat protein; function unknown	YjgL has a central SopA-like domain matching pfam PF13981 with an E value of 9.43e-04 but does not have a matching ubiquitin ligase C-terminal domain associated with SopA and NleL or the SopA pentapeptide repeats. SopA and NleL are Type III secretion effector proteins with E3 ubiquitin ligase activity from Salmonella enterica and E. coli O157:H7, respectively (Diao, 2008; Lin, 2011). YjgL does have 13 tandem copies of a novel hexapeptide repeat motif from residues 186-263 that may coil as parallel beta-sheets; the 13 repeats all start with LN: L-N-[Nds]-[LPSni]-[Qkl]-[EKndv] (lower case indicates minor residues in no more than 2/13 repeats) (K. E. Rudd, 2014, unpublished observations).	b4253
yjgM	None	GNAT family putative N-acetyltransferase	Null	GNAT family putative N-acetyltransferase	Null	b4256
yjgN	None	DUF898 family inner membrane protein	Null	Inner membrane protein, DUF898 family, function unknown	Null	b4257
lptF	yjgP	lipopolysaccharide export ABC permease	Null	LPS export ABC transporter permease	An LptBFGC protein complex has been identified (Narita, 2009).	b4261
lptG	yjgQ	lipopolysaccharide export ABC permease	Null	LPS export ABC transporter permease	An LptBFGC protein complex has been identified (Narita, 2009).	b4262
yjgR	None	DUF853 family protein with NTPase fold	Null	DUF853 family with NTPase fold	7/142 YjgR peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed (Maillet, 2007).	b4263
idnR	gntH, gntS?, yjgS	transcriptional repressor, 5-gluconate-binding	Putative regulator; Not classified	idn operon activator; represses GntR-regulated genes gntKU and gntT	Null	b4264
idnT	gntW, yjgT	L-idonate and D-gluconate transporter	Putative transport; Not classified	L-Idonate transporter; also transports 5-keto-D-gluconate (Reed, 2006) 	IT (Ion Transporter) superfamily (Prakash, 2003). ST(3) structural class based on hydropathy profile (Lolkema, 2003).	b4265
idnO	yjgU	5-keto-D-gluconate-5-reductase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	5-keto-D-Gluconate 5-reductase	Null	b4266
idnD	yjgV	L-idonate 5-dehydrogenase, NAD-binding	Putative enzyme; Not classified	L-Idonate 5-dehydrogenase	Null	b4267
yjgX'	yjgW, yjgY	pseudogene fragment	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction, EptAB family	An apparent frameshift at codon 87 and two in-frame stop codons 250 and 372 were hypothetically reconstructed. An open reading frame on the opposite strand of yjgX' was called yjgW but is unlikely to be a real gene and has been dropped; yjgW is added as a synonym for yjgX as they occupy the same region of DNA, the b number for yjgW is b4274 and has been added as an extra b number to yjgX'. The ECK4265 number assigned to yjgW has been droppped.	b4274
yjhB	None	putative MFS transporter, membrane protein	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative MFS transporter, function unknown; membrane protein; N-acetylneuraminic acid inducible	YjhB is a member of the Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS) of transporters. YjhB is regulated by NanR and is 55% similar to the NanT sialic acid transporter and thus may be involved in the transport of sialic acid-related substrates (Kalivoda, 2013).	b4279
yjhC	None	GFO/IDH/MOCA family putative oxidoreductase. NAD(P)-dependent	Orf; Not classified	Putative NAD(P)-dependent oxidoreductase, function unknown; N-acetylneuraminic acid inducible; GFO/IDH/MOCA family protein	yjhC is in the NanR regulon and may be involved in sialic acid catabolism (Kalivoda, 2013).	b4280
yjhD'	None	pseudogene, KpLE2 phage-like element	Null	Pseudogene, C-terminal fragment	Related to predicted lipoproteins.	b4281
yjhE'	None	pseudogene, KpLE2 phage-like element	Null	Pseudogene, putative transporter remnant; internal fragment near C-terminus	Overexpression causes abnormal biofilm architecture. Intact or pseudogene alleles not found in other sequenced E. coli strains. Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS).	b4282
yjhF	None	putative transporter	Putative transport; Not classified	Predicted GntP family transporter, function unknown	IT (Ion Transporter) superfamily (Prakash, 2003). ST(3) structural class based on hydropathy profile (Lolkema, 2003).	b4296
yjhG	None	putative dehydratase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Predicted dehydratase, function unknown	yjhG, yagF, ilvD and edd are paralogs.	b4297
yjhH	None	putative lyase/synthase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Function unknown	Null	b4298
yjhI	None	putative DNA-binding transcriptional regulator	Putative regulator; Not classified	Function unknown	Null	b4299
sgcR	yjhJ	putative DNA-binding transcriptional regulator	Putative regulator; Not classified	Putative sgc cluster transcriptional regulator	Null	b4300
sgcE	yjhK	putative epimerase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Predicted pentose-5-phosphate 3-epimerase	Null	b4301
sgcA	yjhL	putative phosphotransferase enzyme IIA component	Putative transport; Not classified	Predicted phosphotransferase enzyme IIA	Null	b4302
sgcQ	yjhM	putative nucleoside triphosphatase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Putative gene in sgc gene cluster, function unknown	Null	b4303
sgcC	yjhN	putative PTS system EIIC permease component	Putative transport; Not classified	Predicted PTS system EIIC permease component	SgcC is one of three unusual PTS E	b4304
sgcX	yjhO	putative endoglucanase with Zn-dependent exopeptidase domain	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Peptidase homolog, function unknown	ypdE, frvX and sgcX are paralogs. M42 family.	b4305
yjhP	None	putative methyltransferase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Putative SAM-dependent methyltransferase, function unknown	Kuzin A., Manor P., Benach J., Smith P., Rost B., Xiao R., Montelione G., Hunt J., X-ray structure of YjhP from E. coli, Northeast Structural Genomics Research Consortium (NESG) Target ER13, to be published.	b4306
yjhQ	None	GNAT family putative N-acetyltransferase	Null	GNAT family putative N-acetyltransferase	Null	b4307
yjhR'	None	pseudogene, helicase family	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction, helicase family, C-terminal fragment	An apparent frameshift at codon 71 is hypothetically reconstructed. YjhR is homologous to the C-terminal domain of predicted helicases (UniProtKB: Q4FBH4). May be functional since it has been reported to confer a selective growth advantage (Junker, 2006).	b4308
nanS	yjhS	9-O-acetyl N-acetylneuraminic acid esterase	Null	9-O-acetyl N-acetylneuraminic acid deacetylase; sialyl esterase	The enzymatic activity and crystal structure (PDB:3PT5) of NanS(Z5905) from E. coli O157:H7, with only 9 amino acids differences from K-12 NanS, has been determined (Rangarajan, 2011). nanS is required for growth on 9-O-acetyl-N-acetylneuraminic acid [Neu5,9Ac2]; it is unknown whether NanT can transport acetylated sialic acids, so NanS could be periplasmic or cytoplasmic (Steenbergen, 2009). The signal peptide prediction by SignalP is weak and is not predicted; experimental localization and signal cleavage assessement is needed.	b4309
nanM	yjhT	N-acetylneuraminic acid mutarotase	Null	N-acetylneuraminic acid mutarotase	NanM has N-acetylneuraminic acid mutarotase activity and is required for the efficient utilization of N-acetylneuraminic acid (Da Severi, 2008). The first 19 are a type I signal peptide; the processed mature N-terminal fragment was confirmed by MS as 2/24 NamM(YjhT) peptides matching the processed N-terminus (Maillet, 2007). The first 19 aa are confirmed to be a type I signal peptide by electrospray MS of the C-terminally His-tagged mature protein (obs. MW = 38686) expressed from a clone, confirming the cleavage site (Da Severi, 2008). NanM has six Kelch domain propeller blades (Da Severi, 2008; Pfam:PF01344).	b4310
gntP	yjiB	fructuronate transporter	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	Fructuronate and gluconate transporter	Induced by fructuronate, but not gluconate; induced by glucuronate via its conversion to fructuronate. Required for growth on fructuronate. UxuR regulon. OmrB, and possibly OmrA, regulates gntP (Tjaden, 2006). IT (Ion Transporter) superfamily (Prakash, 2003). ST(3) structural class based on hydropathy profile (Lolkema, 2003).	b4321
yjiC	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Function unknown	yjfZ and yjiC are paralogs and E. coli-only genes. They have different N-terminal domains.	b4325
iraD	yjiD	RpoS stabilzer after DNA damage, anti-RssB factor	Null	RpoS stabilzer after DNA damage, anti-RssB factor; anti-adapter protein	Null	b4326
hypT	qseD, yjiE	hypochlorite-responsive transcription factor	Regulator; Global regulatory functions	Hypochlorite-responsive transcription factor	Three HypT(YjiE) methionine residues are converted to methionine sulfoxides by HOCl, activating HypT as a transcription factor; MsrA and MsrB inactivate HypT (Dazic, 2013). hypT(yjiE) mutants are sensitive to HOCl and yjiE plasmids confer HOCl resistance (Gebendorfer, 2012). HypT(YjiE) is a global regulator responding to HOCl exposure that replenishes methionine and cysteine pools and down-regulates genes involved in iron acquisition (Gebendorfer, 2012). HypT(YjiE) forms a variety of oligomers including dimers, tetramers and hexamers (Gebendorfer, 2012). The identification of YjiE as a motility regulator has been challenged as subsequently no effects of HypT(YjiE) on motility were observed (Gebendorfer, 2012). HypT(YjiE) is a LysR-type transcriptional regulator. HypT(YjiE) was initially identified as a cell density-dependent motility repressor.	b4327
iadA	yjiF	isoaspartyl dipeptidase	Enzyme; Degradation of proteins, peptides, glyco	Isoaspartyl dipeptidase	Null	b4328
yjiG	None	SpmB family inner membrane protein	Null	SpmB family inner membrane protein, function unknown	Null	b4329
yjiH	None	nucleoside recognition pore and gate family putative inner membrane transporter	Null	Nucleoside recognition family predicted inner membrane transporter; predicted pore and gate protein, function unknown	YjiH is a predicted inner membrane protein with a nucleoside transport recognition pore and gate family domain (Pfam PF07670).	b4330
kptA	yjiI	RNA 2'-phosphotransferase	Null	RNA 2'-phosphotransferase; ligates tRNA substrate in vitro, physiological role and in vivo substrate unknown	Null	b4331
yjiJ	None	DUF1228 family putative inner membrane MFS superfamily transporter	Putative transport; Not classified	DUF1228 family putative inner membrane transporter; MFS superfamily; function unknown	YjiJ is a DUF1228 family (Pfam PF06779) putative inner membrane transporter in the MFS superfamily (Pfam CL0015). The yjiJ promoter region binds ArcA (Federowicz, 2014).	b4332
yjiK	None	SdiA-regulated family putative membrane-anchored protein; putative phytase-like esterase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	SdiA-regulated domain protein; predicted membrane-anchored protein; possible phytase-like esterase; function unknown	The yjiK gene of the E. coli EHEC strain O157:H7 is induced 4.6-fold by exogenous AHL addition; this induction is eliminated in an sdiA mutant srain (Hughes, 2010). SdiA belongs to the SdiA-regulated family (PF06977) and may be distantly related to the "esterase-like activity of phytase" family domain (PF13449; CDD search E=0.01). YjiK has a predicted single transmembrane N-terminal membrane anchor. Although the PDB structure of the YjiK soluble domain is derived from CFT073, it only differs from the K-12 allele at three positions. SdiA regulon.	b4333
yjiL	None	putative ATPase, activator of (R)-hydroxyglutaryl-CoA dehydratase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Function unknown	Null	b4334
yjiM	None	putative 2-hydroxyglutaryl-CoA dehydratase	Null	Function unknown	Null	b4335
yjiN	None	zinc-type alcohol dehydrogenase-like protein	Null	Zinc-type alcohol dehydrogenase-like protein, function unknown	Null	b4336
mdtM	yjiO	multidrug efflux system protein	Putative transport; Not classified	Multidrug resistance efflux protein; overexpression resistance to acriflavin, chloramphenicol, TPP, norfloxacin and ethidium	Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS). 	b4337
yjiP'	yjiQ	pseudogene, transposase_31 family protein	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction, transposase_31 family	Stop codon 104 of yjiP is translated as an X in the reconstructed protein sequence. Intact alleles of yjiP are present in many E. coli strains, e. g. O157:H7 EDL933 Z5940, which have Q104.	b4339
yjiR	None	putative DNA-binding transcriptional regulator/putative aminotransferase	Putative regulator; Not classified	Predicted HTH transcriptional regulator with aminotransferase domain, function unknown; MocR family	The divergent yjiR-yjiS promoter region binds ArcA and ArcA represses yjiR expression (Federowicz, 2014).	b4340
yjiS	None	DUF1127 family protein	Null	DUF1127 family protein, function unknown	yjiA and yjiS are widely shared genes flanking the variable Immigration Control Region (ICR) restriction-modification cassettes of enterobacterial genomes (Sibley, 2004). The divergent yjiR-yjiS promoter region binds ArcA (Federowicz, 2014).	b4341
yjiT'	None	pseudogene	Null	Pseudogene, N-terminal fragment	A deletion event has apparently removed the C-terminus of YjiT and the N-terminus of YjiV. YjiT matches the first 488 aa of the 1099 aa Salmonella typhi YjiT ortholog STY4851. YjiT is homologous to the N-terminus of E. coli O157:H7 Z5897 (1117 aa).	b4342
yjiV'	mcrD, yjiU	pseudogene	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction, helicase-like, C-terminal fragment	YjiV belongs to a helicase family of long proteins with unique C-terminal domains. A portion of this putative, reconstructed yjiV pseudogene was originally annotated as mcrD in Genbank X55662, and reported to inhibit McrE restriction (Raleigh, 1991, citing unpublished information). YjiV is homologous to Z5898 (2104 aa) from E. coli O157:H7, SPA4314 (2106 aa) from Salmonella paratyphi-a, and lpl2494 (2106) from Legionella pneumophila. The reconstructed YjiV pseudogene translation lacks the first ~400 aa, has a disabled stop at codon 45, is missing ~730 aa after residue 717, represented by an X at position 718, then is followed by the C-terminal 261 aa fragment. The Salmonella typhi YjiV ortholog appears to be frameshifted, forming two orfs: STY4849 and STY4850. The N-terminal deletion event also removed the C-terminus of YjiT.	b4486
symE	dinL, sosC, yjiW	toxic peptide regulated by antisense sRNA symR	Null	Toxic peptide regulated by antisense sRNA symR, function unknown	SymE is toxic when overexpressed which leads to inhibition of protein synthesis and RNA degradation (Kawano, 2007). LexA regulon. Lon protease substrate. SymE is a distant homolog of antitoxin MazE (Kawano, 2007).	b4347
yjiX	None	DUF466 family protein	Null	DUF466 family protein, function unknown; may be involved with oligopeptide uptake	Paralogs cstA and yjiY are both in operons with paralogous small proteins of unknown function, ybdD and yjiX, respectively.	b4353
yjiY	oppE?	putative transporter	Orf; Not classified	Predicted transporter, function unknown; YehTU-regulated in stationary phase	yjiY is transcriptionally regulated by the YehTU two-component system; yjiY expression is absent in a yehTU mutant; the response regulator YehT binds the yjiY promoter as its only DNA target; yjiY is induced in stationary phase when cells are growing on amino acids or peptides (Kraxenberger, 2012). The YpdAB and YehTU two-component regulators are paralogous; these two systems may be interconnected since they both regulate yjiY, directly by YehTU and indirectly by YpdAB; although not noted by the authors, both sytems also regulate yhjX, indirectly by YehTU and directly by YpdAB; the putative transporter genes yhjX and yjiY are the only two genes significantly regulated by YpdAB and YehTU (Fried, 2013). Caveat: experiments using overproduction of response regulators may cause artifactual cross-talk regulation. A prediction that yjiY is oppE is based upon genetic mapping that places oppE in this region and the peptide utilization phenotype of its paralog cstA. Paralogs cstA and yjiY are both in operons with paralogous small proteins of unknown function, ybdD and yjiX, respectively. HT_Cmplx48_Mem: SecA+YdgA+YjiY.	b4354
lgoT	yjiZ, yjjL	putative L-galactonate:H+ symporter	Putative transport; Not classified	L-galactonate transporter; membrane protein	lgoT(yjjL) mutants fail to grow on L-galactonate and lgoT(yjjL) is upregulated during growth on L-galactonate (Reed, 2006). LgoT(YjjL) is a member of the Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS) and is probably an L-galactonate:H+ symporter.	b4356
lgoR	yjjM	putative transcriptional activator for L-galactonate catabolism	Null	Transcriptional regulator for L-galactonate catabolism	lgoR(yjjM) mutants fail to grow on L-galactonate and lgoR(yjjM) is upregulated during growth on L-galactonate, indicating that LgoR(YjjM) is a probable positive transcriptional regulator for the lgo genes (Reed, 2006). lgoR(yjjM) and lgoD(yjjN) are probably regulated by ExuR (Suvorova, 2011). LgoR(YjjM) has an N-terminal GntR family putative DNA-binding domain (Pfam PF00392)) and a C-terminal probable inducer L-galactonate binding FCD domain (Pfam PF07729).	b4357
lgoD	yjjN	L-galactonate oxidoreductase; L-gulonate oxidoreductase	Enzyme; L-galactonate catabolism	L-galactonate oxidoreductase; L-galactonate catabolism; L-gulonate oxidoreductase; L-gulonate catabolism	Purified LgoD(YjjN) has both L-galactonate dehydrogenase and L-gulonate dehydrogenase activity in vitro (Kuivanen, 2014). lgoD(yjjN) is upregulated during growth on L-galactonate and lgoD(yjjN) mutants grow very poorly on L-galactonate (Reed, 2006). LgoR(YjjM) and LgoD(YjjN) are probably regulated by ExuR (Suvorova, 2011). LgoD(YjjN) is likely to be the L-galactonate oxidoreductase involved in L-galactonate catabolism described earlier (Cooper, 1979).	b4358
opgB	mdoB, yjjO	OPG periplasmic biosynthetic phosphoglycerol transferases I (membrane-bound) and II (soluble);	Enzyme; Osmoregulated periplasmic glucan (OPG) biosynthesis biolsynthesis	OPG biosynthetic phosphoglycerol transferases I and II; periplasmic	The opg genes were originally called mdo because the osmoregulated periplasmic glucans (OPGs) were originally called membrane-derived oligosaccharides. OpgB encodes two periplasmic phosphoglycerol transferases: the soluble periplasmic phosphoglycerol transferase II is cleaved away from the membrane-bound periplasmic phosphoglycerol transferase I (Lequette, 2008).	b4359
yjjP	None	DUF1212 family inner membrane protein	Putative structure; Not classified	Inner membrane protein, DUF1212 family, function unknown; H-NS-repressed	Null	b4364
yjjQ	None	putative transcriptional regulator	Putative regulator; Not classified	Putative transcriptional regulator, function unknown; H-NS-repressed, dimeric	yjjQ is the first gene in the yjjQ-bglJ operon but YjjQ and BglJ do not physically interact, and neither YjjQ overexpression nor a yjjQ deletion affects regulation of the bglBFGH operon (Venkatesh, 2010). A LexA-based two-hybrid test indicates that YjjQ forms homodimers (Venkatesh, 2010). Only clones including the most upstream bglJ ATG codon express functional BglJ (Venkatesh, 2010). A yjjQ deletion in E. coli APEC strain IMT5155 (O2:H5:K1) is virulence-defective, grows poorly in minimal medium, regulates various amino acid biosynthesis genes, and has reduced transcription of iron uptake genes (Li, 2008). An insertion in yjjQ confers increased sensitivity to methylglyoxal and dihydroxyacetone in a gloA mutant background (Kim, 2007). LuxR family.	b4365
bglJ	yjjR	bgl operon transcriptional activator	Regulator; Not classified	Transcriptional activator for the silent bgl operon; requires the bglJ4 allele to function; LuxR family	The bglJ4 mutation activates the silent bgl operon and allows arbutin and salicin transport and utilization.	b4366
fhuF	yjjS	ferric iron reductase involved in ferric hydroximate transport	Null	Siderophore-iron reductase; releases iron from hydroxamate-type siderophores; cytoplasmic	CsdB (SufS) and SufD are required to insert an iron-sulfur cluster into FhuF. FhuF is loosely associated with the cytoplasmic membrane. Fur regulon.	b4367
rsmC	yjjT	16S rRNA m(2)G1207 methyltransferase, SAM-dependent	Enzyme; rRNA modification	16S rRNA m(2)G1207 methyltransferase, SAM-dependent	Null	b4371
yjjU	None	putative patatin-like family phospholipase	Null	Predicted phospholipase, patatin-like family, function unknown	The patatin-like family (also known as the NTE family) pfam01734 contains proteins with a predicted phospholipase domain. YjjU and RssA(YchK) are distant homologs of the pfam01734 superfamily; RssA (COG1752 family) appears to be a core gene while YjjU (COG4667 family) appears to be a horizontal transfer. yjjU is in the CueR regulon (Marbach, 2012). yjjU is in the GadE regulon (Marbach, 2012).	b4377
yjjV	None	putative DNase	Null	Predicted DNase, function unknown; tatD paralog but no Tat phenotype	6/33 YjjV peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is not removed (Maillet, 2007).	b4378
yjjW	None	putative pyruvate formate lyase activating enzyme	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Predicted YjjI activase	YjjW is a predicted PflA-like radical SAM activase (Pfam PF04055) that has an N-terminal predicted 4Fe-4S binding domain (residues 41-63; Pfam PF00037); yjjI and yjjW are in an operon and YjjW may bind and activate YjjI.	b4379
yjjX	None	non-canonical purine NTP phosphatase, ITPase/XTPase	Null	Non-canonical purine NTP phosphatase, ITPase/XTPase; dimeric	ITP and XTP are products of oxidative damage and inhibitors of transcription and YjjX may be involved in detoxifying ITP and XTP, but the physiological significance and in vivo substrates for YjjX is uncertain (Zheng, 2005). The association of YjjX with Ef-Tu is of unknown physiological significance, since Ef-Tu is an abundant and sticky protein. YjjX is implicated in the detoxification of the thiamine metabolism inhibitors bacimethrin and CF3-HMP.	b4394
yjjY	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Function unknown	Immunoblots of chromosomal SPA-tagged YjjY showed a band the size of the 8 kd SPA tag only, indicating that if yjjY is a gene, it is poorly expressed and unstable under the conditions tested (Hemm, 2008).	b4402
yjgZ	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Function unknown	Null	b4277
yjhU	None	putative DNA-binding transcriptional regulator; KpLE2 phage-like element	Putative regulator; Not classified	Predicted transcriptional regulator, function unknown	LsrR and YjhU are COG2390-related paralogs with Sigma 70-like N-terminal DNA-binding domains and C-terminal substrate-binding domains related to sugar-binding domains like that in the Gram+ DeoR repressor. 6/45 YjhU peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is not removed (Maillet, 2007).	b4295
yacL	None	UPF0231 family protein	Null	UPF0231 family protein, function unknown	Null	b0119
fabF	cvc, fabJ, vtr	3-oxoacyl-[acyl-carrier-protein] synthase II	Enzyme; Fatty acid and phosphatidic acid biosynthesis	Beta-ketoacyl-ACP synthase II; KAS II; homodimeric	fabF is in the PurR regulon (Marbach, 2012).	b1095
yfcC	None	putative inner membrane transporter; C4-dicarboxylate anaerobic carrier family protein	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Putative inner membrane transporter, C4-dicarboxylate anaerobic carrier family, function unknown	IT (Ion Transporter) superfamily (Prakash, 2003). ST(3) structural class based on hydropathy profile (Lolkema, 2003). The yfcC promoter region binds FNR and yfcC is activated by FNR (Federowicz, 2014).	b2298
caiE	None	stimulator of CaiD and CaiB enzyme activities	Putative enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	Stimulates activities of CaiD and CaiB	CaiE is a member of the hexapeptide repeat acetyltransferase superfamily. CaiE is related to gamma class carbonic anhydrases.	b0035
rluA	yabO	dual specificity 23S rRNA pseudouridine(746), tRNA pseudouridine(32) synthase, SAM-dependent	Enzyme; rRNA modification; tRNA modification	23S rRNA pseudouridine(746), tRNA pseudouridine(32) synthase; dual specificity	Null	b0058
yabP'	yabQ	pseudogene, pentapeptide repeats-containing	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction, pentapeptide repeats-containing	YabP is a pentapeptide repeat-containing protein of unknown function (NCBI COG1357, Pfam PF00805) with seven copies of a pentapeptide repeat (residues 190-224). The YabP pentapeptide repeat consensus A(T,N)(P,h)DG (h=hydrophobic aa, only the A is invariant) differs somewhat from the published pentapeptide repeat consensuses A(D,N)LXX and (S,T,A,V)(D,N)(L,F)(S,T,R)G (Bateman, 1998; Vetting, 2006). YabP appears to be distantly related to the COG1357 family and apart from the easily identified 7 pentapeptide repeats appears to have degenerated or evolved, possibly acquiring a new function. One N was added after genome coordinate 59052 to hypothetically reverse a yadP' frameshift and reconstruct YabP' with X194 at the frameshift site; the missing base in yabP marked by an N is probably the G present at this location in intact versions of the yabP gene, coding for Gly194. An intact copy of YabP' (UniProt L3L3Z3) with no mismatches other than the X194G is found in the E. coli strain KTE51 genome sequence (Genbank ANUD01000013, locus_tag=A1SA_00636). Alleles of YabP in various other E. coli strains have deletions or insertions of pentapeptide repeats in various phases of the pentapeptide repeat, for example E. coli KTE130 (Genbank ASVN01000010, locus_tag=A1YG_00516) which has a single pentapeptide repeat deletion relative to K-12 and KTE51 at the site of the K-12 frameshift mutation. A PDB structure distantly related to the pentapeptide repeat domain of YabP is PDB 2J8K from N. punctiforme, which forms highly symmetric right-handed quadrilateral beta-helices similar to those found in MfpA from M. tuberculosis, a DNA gyrase inhibitor thought to be a B-form DNA mimic (Hedge, 2005; Vetting, 2007). YadP is restricted to E. coli and several alleles are misannotated as undecaprenyl pyrophosphate phosphatase (e.g. UniProt H4VRD6) or non-LEE-encoded type III secreted effector (e.g. UniProt E8J137). An expression clone over-producing the last 52 residues of yabP' (labeled as yabQ, the pre-pseudogene reconstruction name for that fragment) has been reported to suppress the slow growth phenotype of an rsgA deletion mutant, but the physiological relevance of this is unclear (Campbell, 2008).	b4659
degQ	hhoA	serine endoprotease, periplasmic	Enzyme; Degradation of proteins, peptides, glycopeptides	Periplasmic serine endoprotease; multicopy suppressor of prc and degP	Null	b3234
gstA	gst	glutathionine S-transferase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Thioredoxin, glutaredoxin, glutathione	Glutathione S-transferase; hydrogen peroxide resistance	yliJ has been renamed gstB, so gst is renamed gstA (Desai, 2010).	b1635
yhcB	None	DUF1043 family inner membrane-anchored protein	Null	DUF1043 family inner membrane-anchored protein; biofilm-related	YhcB was found associated with cytochrome bd oxidase in a proteomic study, but subsequent work found that YhcB has no role in CydAB function (Stenberg, 2005; Mogi, 2006). YhcB has been detected as a membrane-bound homopentamer, probably tethered by a single N-terminal membrane anchor (Maddalo, 2011). An outcrossed yhcB deletion from the Keio collection conferred reduced biofilm formation; a yhcB rodZ(yfgA) double mutant could not be constructed indicating that this is a synthetically lethal combination (Niba, 2007).	b3233
torR	None	response regulator in two-component regulatory system with TorS	Regulator; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Response regulator for torCAD operon	Null	b0995
torT	yccH	periplasmic sensory protein associated with the TorRS two-component regulatory system	Regulator; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Periplasmic TMAO binding protein; required for ToSrR response to TMAO	TorT binds TMAO and interacts with the periplasmic domain of TorS (Baraquet, 2006).	b0994
torS	yccI	hybrid sensory histidine kinase in two-component regulatory system with TorR	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Sensor kinase for torCAD operon	Null	b0993
lptA	yhbN	lipopolysaccharide export ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein; Lipid A binding protein; LPS export and assembly protein	Lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis	LPS export ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein; Lipid A binding protein; LPS export and assembly protein	LptC binds LPS in vitro and LptA can displace LPS from LptC, but not the reverse, consistent with an LPS export pathway (Tran, 2010). LptA is localized to the periplasm (Sperandeo, 2007). LptA depletion results in rifampicin/bile salts sensitivity, indicative of an outer membrane integrity defect (Sperandeo, 2006). The failure to produce a viable deletion strain indicates that lptA is an essential gene (Baba, 2006). LptA is paralogous to LptD(OstA,Imp). The first 27 aa of LptA are a type I signal peptide. lptAB expression is RpoE-dependent (Sperandeo, 2007).	b3200
ybdF	None	DUF419 family protein	Null	DUF419 family protein	Null	b0579
ybdG	mscM	mechanosensitive channel protein, miniconductance	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Other	Mechanosensitive channel protein, MscM-like; heptameric	ybdG gene expression is enhanced by osmotic stress; normally YbdG protects agains mild osmotic shock but when overexpressed confers protection against severe osmotic shock; the YbdG channel did not gate in patch clamp experiments unless a beta domain mutation (V229A) is introduced, allowing the characterization of YbdG as a mini-conductance channel; additional miniconductance channel protein(s) were inferred to exist because residual miniconductance activity was observed in ybdG mutants (Schumann, 2010). Although YbdG has a conductance similar to MscM and was previously proposed to be a component of the originally observed MscM activity, identification of YjeP as the protein responsible for the original MscM activity indicates that YjeP should be renamed as MscM (Edwards, 2012). Following the suggestion to rename YjeP as MscM, yjeP has been renamed as mscM. mscS, mscK(kefA), mscM(yjeP), ybiO, ybdG and ynaI are paralogs of the MscS family.	b0577
csgB	agfB(S.t.)	curlin nucleator protein, minor subunit in curli complex	Structural component; Surface structures	Curli nucleator protein curlin CsgB, minor curli subunit	The csgAB operon is regulated by CsgD. RpoS regulon.	b1041
adhP	yddN	ethanol-active dehydrogenase/acetaldehyde-active reductase	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Ethanol-active dehydrogenase/acetaldehyde-active reductase	Medium chain dehydrogenase/reductase (MDR) activity of AdhP was reported by Shafqat (1999). The 1-propanol substrate preference characterization and the N-terminal sequence of AdhP verifiying that the initial Met is not clipped is cited in UniProtKB P39451 and attributed to S. Harayama, 1994.	b1478
ybaL	ylaA	inner membrane putative NAD(P)-binding transporter	Putative transport; Not classified	Potassium transporter homolog, function unknown	ybaL mutations repeatedly arise as favorable mutations during serial growth at 42C in minimal medium (Kishimoto, 2010; Tenaillon, 2012).	b0478
yiaG	None	HTH_CROC1 family putative transcriptional regulator	Null	Predicted transcriptional regulator, function unknown	PF01381 family.	b3555
dppB	None	dipeptide/heme ABC transporter permease	Transport; Not classified	Dipeptide/heme ABC transporter permease; also transports 5-aminolevulinic acid	E. coli does not normally use exogeneous heme, but heme can be utilized if a foreign OM heme receptor is expressed in E. coli (Letoffe, 2006).	b3543
dppC	None	dipeptide/heme ABC transporter permease	Transport; Not classified	Dipeptide/heme ABC transporter permease; also transports 5-aminolevulinic acid	E. coli does not normally use exogeneous heme, but heme can be utilized if a foreign OM heme receptor is expressed in E. coli (Letoffe, 2006).	b3542
dppD	None	dipeptide/heme ABC transporter ATPas	Transport; Not classified	Dipeptide/heme ABC transporter ATPase; also transports 5-aminolevulinic acid	E. coli does not normally use exogeneous heme, but heme can be utilized if a foreign OM heme receptor is expressed in E. coli (Letoffe, 2006).	b3541
dppF	None	dipeptide/heme ABC transporter ATPas	Transport; Not classified	Dipeptide/heme ABC transporter ATPase; also transports 5-aminolevulinic acid	E. coli does not normally use exogeneous heme, but heme can be utilized if a foreign OM heme receptor is expressed in E. coli (Letoffe, 2006).	b3540
gntK	None	gluconate kinase 2	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Miscellaneous glucose metabolism	Gluconokinase, thermoresistant	Null	b3437
gntR	None	d-gluconate inducible gluconate regulon transcriptional repressor	Regulator; Central intermediary metabolism: Entner-Douderoff	D-gluconate regulon transcriptional repressor; D-gluconate inducible	Null	b3438
gntU	None	gluconate transporter, low affinity GNT 1 system	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	Low-affinity gluconate transport protein, membrane protein	IT (Ion Transporter) superfamily (Prakash, 2003). ST(3) structural class based on hydropathy profile (Lolkema, 2003). 	b4476
ygcB	cas3	Cascade complex anti-viral R-loop helicase-annealase Cas3	Null	R-loop helicase-annealase Cas3, CRISPR-associated; needed for Cascade anti-viral activity	E. coli Cas3 is a bifunctional enzyme with two activities: (1) an ATP-independent magnesium-dependent model RNA-DNA R-loop annealing activity mediated by an N-terminal HD phosphohydrolase domain and (2) an ATP-dependent R-loop RNA unwinding activity mediated by a C-terminal DEAH helicase domain; these antagonistic functions are toggled by ATP levels; the Cascade complex can also promote R-loop formation (Jamieson, 2011). Unlike Cas3 from S. thermophilus, E. coli Cas3 does not possess HD domain-dependent endonuclease activity (Sinkunas, 2011; Jamieson, 2011). The Cascade antiviral complex is comprised of CasABCDE and short CRISPR RNAs (crRNAs) and requires the helicase-annealase YgcB(Cas3) for activity (Brouns, 2008).	b2761
dsrB	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Function unknown, regulated by DsrA, H-NS, and RpoS	Null	b1952
rnk	None	regulator of nucleoside diphosphate kinase	Regulator; Central intermediary metabolism: Nucleotide interconversions	Regulator of nucleoside diphosphate kinase; suppresses Pseudomonas algR2	Null	b0610
pdxK	pdxL, thiJ, yfeI	pyridoxal-pyridoxamine kinase/hydroxymethylpyrimidine kinase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Pyridoxine	B6-vitamer kinase; pyridoxine (PN)/pyridoxal (PL)/pyridoxamine (PM) kinase	Involved in the salvage pathway of pyridoxal 5'-phosphate biosynthesis. 2/15 PdxK peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed (Maillet, 2007).	b2418
yfeK	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Uncharacterized protein	The first 19 aa of YfeK are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b2419
wcaM	yefK	colanic acid biosynthesis protein	Null	Colanic acid biosynthesis protein	Verified Tat substrate: WcaM has a predicted Tat-only (Class I) 28 aa signal peptide (Tullman-Ercek, 2007).	b2043
wcaL	yefL	putative glycosyl transferase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Putative colanic acid biosynthesis glycosyl transferase	Null	b2044
ycjD	None	DUF559 family endonuclease-related protein	Null	DUF559 family endonuclease-related protein, function unknown	YcjD is a DUF559 family protein related to restriction endonucleases (Pfam PF13544; NCBI CDD cd01038; InterPro IPR011335).	b1289
mdaB	mda66	NADPH quinone reductase	Phenotype; Not classified	FMN-dependent NADH-quinone reductase; MdaB and YgiN form an enzymatic quinone reduction-oxidation cycle in vitro; possibly mitigates toxicity of quinols and quinones in vivo; dimeric	MdaB overexpression results in resistance to cytotoxic drugs including adriamycin, etoposide and the tumoricidal agent DMP 840. Induced 25-fold by 2-methylene-4-butyrolactone and 2-methyl-1,4-naphthoquinone (menadione). mdaB is in an operon with ygiN. Reduces menadione to menadiol. May have some nitroreductase activity. Paradoxically also reported to be NADPH-specific.	b3028
ygiN	None	quinol monooxygenase	Null	Quinol monooxygenase; MdaB and YgiN form an enzymatic quinone reduction-oxidation cycle in vitro; expressed protein	YgiN is structurally similar to YdhR and the ActVA-Orf6 hydroxyquinone monooxygenase. YgiN was able to reoxidize menadiol, a product of MdaB, back to menadione. YgiN is in an operon with mdaB.	b3029
yceJ	None	putative cytochrome b561	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Cytochrome b561 homolog	The yceJI operon promoter region has an ArcA binding site (Federowicz, 2014).	b1057
gltJ	None	glutamate/aspartate ABC transporter permease	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	Glutamate/aspartate ABC transporter permease	Null	b0654
gltK	None	glutamate/aspartate ABC transporter permease	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	Glutamate/aspartate ABC transporter permease	Null	b0653
gltL	None	glutamate/aspartate ABC transporter ATPase	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	Glutamate, aspartate ABC transporter ATP-binding protein	Null	b0652
flgM	mviS	anti-sigma factor for FliA (sigma 28)	Factor; Surface structures	Anti-sigma 28 (FliA) factor; regulator of FlhD	Flk prevents premature FlgM secretion. FlgM function is stopped when it is secreted into the periplasm or the medum. FlgM is characterized primarily in Salmonella; the fMet of Salmonella FlgM is clipped. yceN was identified as one of two ORFs adjacent to the flg locus in a region originally named mviS, then renamed mviN and mviM when sequenced; mviMN was thought to be required for mouse virulence in Salmonella, but the mviMN deletion in ST39 also removed flgM (Carsiotis, 1989). flgM was later shown to be able to complement the mviS phenotype, and thus flgM is the real mouse virulence gene mviS in this region of the Salmonella chromosome (Schmitt, 1994).	b1071
flgN	None	export chaperone for FlgK and FlgL	Phenotype; Surface structures	Initiation of flagellar filament assembly	Null	b1070
lpxH	ybbF	UDP-2,3-diacylglucosamine pyrophosphohydrolase	Null	Lipid A synthesis, UDP-2,3-diacylglucosamine pyrophosphohydrolase	Null	b0524
uidR	gusR	transcriptional repressor	Regulator; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Transcriptional repressor for the uid operon	TetR family.	b1618
uidC	gusC	putative outer membrane porin for beta-glucuronides porin protein	Membrane; Inner membrane	Putative OM porin for beta-glucuronides	UidC(GusC) is related to the PorD porin of P. aeruginosa. The gusC gene was renamed uidC to match uidABR. The overexpressed protein (from native RBS signals) from the non-K-12 strain CE1 was experimentally characterized and its mature protein was N-terminally sequenced. ybfM and uidC are paralogs. The GTG at codon 5 could be an alternative start.	b1615
solA	None	N-methyltryptophan oxidase, FAD-binding	Putative enzyme; Not classified	N-methyltryptophan oxidase, FAD-containing; monomeric	SolA has weak activity on carbinolamines, sarcosine and other secondary amino acids. The physiological substrate for SolA is unknown. Cys308 of SolA is the probable FAD attachment site. Mass spectral analysis gives an observed MW of 41684 daltons. FAD-SolA holoenzyme MW is predicted as 41688, indicating the sequence and start codon is correct and that the initial Met is not clipped.	b1059
dinI	None	DNA damage-inducible protein I	Phenotype; Not classified	Stabilizes RecA filaments; multicopy suppressor of dinD cold-sensitive filamentous phenotype; possible ssDNA mimic	DinI inhibits RecA co-protease activity of UmuD, but not LexA. DinI (positive action) directly competes with RecX (negative action) as modulators of RecA function.	b1061
pmrD	None	inactive two-component system connector protein	Putative transport; Drug/analog sensitivity	Inactive two-component system connector protein ortholog; active Salmonella PmrD blocks dephosphorylation of PmrA(BasR) by PmrB(BasS)	In Salmonella but not E. coli, low Mg(2+) PhoP-activated PmrD controls PmrA(BasR)/PmrB(BasS) activity post-translationally by binding to phospho-PmrA(BasR) and inhibiting its dephosphorylation but not its phosphotransfer, connecting the PhoPQ and PmrAB two-component systems and allowing for an amplified and persistent PmrAB response (Kato, 2007). E. coli pmrD is induced by low Mg(2+) in a PhoP-dependent manner, thus the E. coli prmD product itself is non-functional, as shown by the fact that replacing the E. coli chromosomal prmD with the Salmonella prmD confers the Salmonella low Mg(2+) response to E. coli (Winfield, 2004). Although PmrA represses pmrD transcription in Salmonella, pmrD is not regulated by pmrA in E. coli (Winfield, 2004). A Salmonella prmD mutation eliminates the polymyxin B resistance induced in low Mg(2+), and this defect is corrected by a complementing Salmonella prmD+ clone (Kox, 2000); prmD+ E. coli K-12 does not show low Mg(+2)-induced polymyxin B resistance at all (Kato, 2007). However, citing their unpublished results, Kox (2000) report that E. coli K-12 prmD can fully rescue the Salmonella prmD defect, and they conclude that prmD is functional. Although this experimental result is not refuted, repeated or discussed in Kato (2007), it seems as if this unpublished observation has been retracted. PhoPQ regulon. 	b2259
tpx	yzzJ	lipid hydroperoxide peroxidase	Enzyme; Detoxification	Lipid hydroperoxide peroxidase; thiol peroxidase, antioxidant, thioredoxin-dependent; peroxiredoxin; scavengase P20; induced by acid or base	Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004). although initially reported to be a periplasmic enzyme, the formation of a mixed-disulfide complex with TrxA indicates a cytoplasmic localization (Tao, 2008).	b1324
uspF	ynaF, yzzL	stress-induced protein, ATP-binding protein	Putative structure; Not classified	Stress-induced protein, binds ATP; dimer	An NMR solution structure has been determined for E. coli UspF(YnaF) (Saveanu, 2002). otherPDB (M. jannaschii): 1MJH. The uspF promoter region binds FNR and ydfZ expression is activated by FNR (Federowicz, 2014).	b1376
ygaU	yzzM	uncharacterized protein	Null	BON-LysM protein, function unknown	YgaU has an N-terminal lipid-binding BON domain (PF04972) and a C-terminal LysM peptidoglycan-binding domain (PF01476). RpoS regulon. Nucleoid-associated protein (Ohniwa, 2011). The N-terminus of YgaU has been verified and it does not have a signal peptide although it has a PG-binding domain; its location in the cell has not been verified.	b2665
bamA	ecfK, omp85(N.m.), yaeT, yzzN, yzzY	BamABCDE complex OM biogenesis outer membrane pore-forming assembly factor	Null	Outer membrane protein required for OM biogenesis; in BamABCDE complex; forms pores; PORTA repeats	BamA has a C-terminal beta-barrel OM protein domain and an N-terminal periplasmic domain with five PORTA (polypeptide transport-associated) repeats that bind OM substrate peptides (Gatsos, 2008, Knowles, 2008; Ward, 2009). bamA is an essential gene. The ATG at codon 3 could be the true start codon. bamA is the last gene in the ispU-cdsA-rseP-bamA operon. HT_Cmplx49_Mem: DamX+BamA. ytfM and bamA are paralogs. An erroneous inner membrane localization may indicate binding to an inner membrane protein or cross-contamination (Lopez-Campistrous, 2005). otherPDB(H.ducreyi): 4K3C (Noinaj, 2014). otherPDB(N.gonorrhoeae): 4K3B (Noinaj, 2013).	b0177
iscS	nuvC, yfhO, yzzO	cysteine desulfurase (tRNA sulfurtransferase), PLP-dependent	Enzyme; tRNA modification	Cysteine desulfurase, PLP-dependent; used in synthesis of Fe-S clusters and 4-thiouridine; ThiI transpersulfidase; TusA transpersulfidase; YnjE transpersulfidase; MoaD transpersulfidase; pyridoxal phosphate cofactor linked to Lys206	IscS desulfurase from cysteine via a Cys328 persulfide to binding partners as a transpersulfidase with ThiI Cys456 for tRNA s(4)U8 modification and with TusA Cys19 to thiolate tRNA U34. IscS has selenocysteine lyase activity in vitro. Two components Factor A (NuvA, 9.3) and Factor B (NuvB, ~45') were originally shown to be required for tRNA s(4)U8 modification with NuvC being the pyridoxal phosphate requiring factor; despite the mapping discrepancy it seems likely that IscS (57.3') is Factor C (NuvC) and ThiI (9.3') is Factor A (NuvA) (Kambampati, 2000). IscU and IscS form a complex (Agar, 2000; Tokumoto, 2002; Kato, 2002; Prischi, 2010). The IscU-IscS complex is stabilized by a covalent disifide bond between Cys328 of IscS and Cys63 of IscU (Kato, 2002). YnjE, IscS, MoaD and MoeB form a complex in vivo (Dahl, 2011). IscU has been classified as a "complex-orphan" protein that is largely unstructured unless bound to a partner, i.e. IscS (Prischi, 2010). 2/409 peptide masses from MS analysis indicate that a start codon eight codons upstream is utilized, but this conflicts with protein sequencing results (Maillet, 2007). PDB structures 3LVJ, 3LVK, 3LVL and 3LVM are derived from E. coli O157:H7 but are identical to the K-12 IscS sequence.	b2530
znuA	yebL, yzzP	zinc ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein	Putative factor; Not classified	Zinc ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein	Mutations in znuA have increased motility in the presence of high [NaCl], which normally suppresses motility (Girgis, 2007). 	b1857
yeaD	yzzQ	D-hexose-6-phosphate epimerase-like protein	Putative enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	D-hexose-6-phosphate epimerase-like protein; low abundance protein	YeaD is a member of the D-hexose-6-phosphate epimerase-like family (NCBI CDD cd09020) in the mutarotase superfamily (NCBI CDD cd01081; Pfam PF01263). yeaD is down-regulated twofold by GSNO in defined medium aerobically (Flatley, 2005). The msrB-gapAyeaD divergent operon promoter region binds FNR and gapA-yeaD expression is activated by FNR (Federowicz, 2014). otherPDB (S. typhimurium): 2HTA, 2HTB.	b1780
fliY	yzzR	cystine transporter subunit	Putative transport; Not classified	Cystine-binding protein, periplasmic; part of a L-cysteine/L-cystine shuttle system confering hydrogen peroxide resistance; not required for motility; may regulate FliA (sigma 28)	EamA(YdeD) and FliY constitute a L-cysteine/L-cystine shuttle system confering hydrogen peroxide resistance; FliY and an unknown membrane import permease partner mediate the import of cystine, oxidized cysteine, from the periplasm to the cytoplasm to regenerate cysteine; eamA(ydeD), eamB(yfiK) and fliY are induced by hydrogen peroxide and cysteine (Ohtsu, 2010). FliY, YecC and YecS may constitute an ABC transport system for the import of L-cystine.	b1920
ldtA	erfK, srfK(S.t.), yeeG, yzzT	L,D-transpeptidase linking Lpp to murein	Enzyme; Murein sacculus, peptidoglycan	L,D-transpeptidase linking Lpp to murein, periplasmic	LdtA(ErfK) crosslinks to DsbG in vivo and has an active site cysteine that presumably is kept reduced by DsbG and DsbC to reverse sulfenic acid formation (Depuydt, 2009).	b1990
uspG	UP12, ybdQ, yzzU	universal stress protein UP12	Null	Stress protein, induced in stationary phase; native GroEL substrate; heat shock; mutant sensitive to CCCP; dimeric	An isoform of UspG is adenylated/phosphorylated; UspG has intrinsic autophosphorylation and autoadenylation activity.	b0607
lolA	lplA, yzzV	lipoprotein chaperone	Transport; Protein, peptide secretion	Periplasmic protein responsible for sorting and transporting lipoproteins to outer membrane	Null	b0891
ygfZ	yzzW	iron-sulfur cluster repair protein, plumbagin resistance	Null	Iron-sulfur cluster repair protein; plumbagin resistance protein; hda mutational suppressor; folate and tetrahydofolate binding protein	COG0354 family. A yfgZ null mutant grows poorly on minimal media, is hypersensitive to oxidative stress, and has reduced MiaB activity; YgfZ may remove the formaldehyde from Fe-S enzymes like MiaB by transferring formaldehyde to tetrahydrofolate (Waller, 2010). YgfZ binds folate and tetrahydrofolate and is dependent upon folates for activity (Teplyakov, 2004; Waller, 2010). ygfZ mutants grow slowly, especially at low temperature; the slow growth of ygfZ mutants is suppressed by an mnmE mutation (Ote, 2006). yfgZ mutants are sensitive to plumbagin and YfgZ is involved in plubagin degradation (Lin, 2010). ygfZ expression is induced by plumbagin (Chen, 2006). YgfZ is involved in regulating the level of ATP-dnaA; a null ygfZ mutation suppresses hda mutations (Ote, 2006). YgfZ is structurally similar to the enzyme dimethylglycine oxidase involved in the betaine catabolism pathway (DMGO) of A. globiformis (Teplyakov, 2004) . YgfZ has a yeast homolog, CAF17, that is a component of the transcriptional regulatory complex. YfgZ can form covalent dimers in vitro but the significance of this in vivo is unclear; Cys228 is the only critical conserved residue required for phenotypic complementation (Hasnain, 2012).	b2898
flu	agn, agn43, yeeQ, yzzX	CP4-44 prophage; antigen 43 (Ag43) phase-variable biofilm formation autotransporter	Membrane; Outer membrane constituents; Phage or Prophage Related	Antigen 43, phase-variable bipartite outer membrane protein; Ag43; fluffing protein; CP4-44 defective prophage; affects surface properties, piliation, colony morphology	The annotated start codon for flu has been confirmed by mutagenesis; an alternative upstream in-frame ATG start codon (52 codons before the annotated start and lacking an obvious RBS) functions in vivo to drive a lacZ protein fusion and thus should result in some Ag43 with a signal peptide twice as long as the that produced from the annotated start codon but since a cleavable 104 signal peptide is very unusual the annotation of this alternate start codon will await further studies for confirmation; the upstream isrC sRNA is produced by premature termination of the flu(agn43) mRNA 5' UTR and may regulate csrD expression (Wallecha, 2014). The Ag43 alpha and beta subunits are formed by cleavage at residue 551. Flu (Ag43) can be glycosylated in non-K-12 strains. Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004).	b2000
grxB	None	glutaredoxin 2 (Grx2)	Carrier; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Thioredoxin, glutaredoxin, glutathione	Glutaredoxin 2; regulated by RpoS and ppGpp	Null	b1064
yceK	None	outer membrane integrity lipoprotein	Null	Outer membrane integrity lipoprotein	YceK is needed for outer membrane integrity as evidenced by membrane blebbing after vancomycin treatment, antibiotic hypersensitivity, lowered outer membrane protein content and elevated levels of DegP (Babu, 2011). Repressed during biofilm formation. yceK and yidQ are paralogs. First 15 aa are a type II signal peptide. DUF1375 family.	b1050
rarA	mgsA, ycaJ	recombination intermediate processing DNA-dependent ATPase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	DNA-dependent ATPase involved in processing recombination intermediates; tetrameric	RarA(MgsA) co-purifies with SSB; the DNA-dependent ATPase activity of RarA(MgsA) is inhibited by SSB (Page, 2011). RarA works at replication forks affecting dimer formation. rarA mutants grow poorly when combined with xer or dif mutations. RarA is homologous to DnaX and RuvB.	b0892
yciM	lapB	LPS regulatory protein; putative modulator of LpxC proteolysis	Putative factor; Not classified	LPS regulatory protein; putative modulator of LpxC proteolysis; EnvC-interacting protein; N-terminally anchored cytoplasmic protein; rubredoxin-type redox-sensitive iron center; TPR-repeats-containing protein	yciM is an essential gene required for the down-regulation of lipopolysaccharide synthesis, acting by modulating the levels of the lipid A synthesis enzyme LpxC in an FtsH-dependent manner, possibly by modulating of proteolytic activity of FtsH towards LpxC; the previously reported yciM mutant phenotypes are likely to be due to the presence of a compensatory mutation that allows strains to grow while lacking the essential YciM protein; these compensatory mutations include the lpxC mutation (I186N) found in a Keio yciM deletion mutant strain; mutations in fabZ, lpxA, or lpxD can also suppress the yciM growth defect (Mahalakshmi, 2013). yciM mutant phenotypes include sensitivity to detergents and hydrophobic antibiotics, altered cell morphology and temperature sensitivty on low salt medium (Nicolaes, 2013). YciM has six tandem TPR repeats at residues 69 to 282; TPR domains are usually involved in protein-protein interactions.	b1280
ybdH	None	putative oxidoreductase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Required for swarming phenotype, function unknown; alcohol dehydrogenase homolog	Null	b0599
nudL	yeaB	putative CoA pyrophosphohydrolase, weak 3-phosphohydroxypyruvate phosphatase	Null	Weak 3-phosphohydroxypyruvate phosphatase activity; predicted CoA pyrophosphohydrolase; 	NudL(YeaB) is a Nudix hydrolase that was predicted to have CoA pyrophosphohydrolase activity (McLennan06). pgsA mutants are non-motile due to elevated RpoS levels that repress flhDC transcription; pgsA3 multicopy suppressers gadW, metE and nudL(yeaB) act by increasing RpoS levels (Uchiyama, 2010). nudL(yeaB) is a multi-copy suppressor of a pdxB deletion with weak 3-phosphohydroxypyruvate phosphatase activity (Kim, 2010).	b1813
ttdR	dan, ygiP	transcriptional activator of ttdABT	Putative regulator; Not classified	Transcriptional activator of ttdABT, tartrate-inducible; required for tartrate utilization; anaerobiosis nucleoid protein	TtdR also functions as a general DNA-binding nucleoid protein during anaerobiosis and has been given the synonym Dan, for DNA-binding protein under anaerobic conditions (Teramoto, 2010). LysR family.	b3060
azoR	acpD	NADH-azoreductase, FMN-dependent	Enzyme; Fatty acid and phosphatidic acid biosynthesis	NADH-azoreductase, FMN-dependent	An azoR deletion mutant confers sensitivity to thiol-specific stress induced by external electrophilic quinones (Liu, 2009). AzoR was identifed by N-terminal sequencing in an acyl carrier protein phosphodiesterase preparation and mistaken for the acpD gene. The real acpD gene has been identified (yajB) and renamed acpH. PDB 1TIK is mislabeled as a ACP phosphodiesterase.	b1412
fldB	None	flavodoxin 2	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Aerobic respiration	Flavodoxin-2	Null	b2895
pncC	ygaD	nicotinamide-nucleotide amidohydrolase; NMN amidohydrolase	Enzyme; NMN catabolism	Nicotinamide-nucleotide amidohydrolase; NMN amidohydrolase	NMN amidohydrolase is also known as NMN deamidase. PncC(YgaD) is the only one of three PncC(CinA) domain (PF02464) proteins that has NMN amidohydrolase activity; YdeJ and YfaY are inactive PncC homologs (Galeazzi, 2011). E. coli NMN amidohydrolase is required for the recycling of NAD (via PNC IV) catalyzing the deamidation of NMN to NaMN; unpublished results of S. Sirilan and B. Olivera were cited for the initial report of an NMN amidohydrolase activity in crude extracts of E. coli (Manlapaz-Fernandez, 1973). NMN amidohydrolase was partially purified, but the gene was not identified; NMN amidohydrolase has a native MW of 33K (and an observed pI of 5.3) indicating PncC dimerization; NMN amidohydrolase exhibits a pH optimum of approximately 9 (Hillyard, 1981). PncC is is part of the most active pathway, PNC IV, for recycling NAD in E. coli; a second pathway PNC VI is also present. The assignment of the gene name pncC was originally suggested for the NMN amidohydrolase structural gene in Salmonella (Foster, 1979). The pncC gene was mismapped twice in Salmonella. The initial mapping of pncC in Salmonella was based on a penicillin selection against wildtype that could catabolize NMN; mutants with a pnuA allele of nadR, whose enzymatic activity is required for NMN uptake by assisting in the nicotinamide riboside substrate conversion to NMN and release from the PnuC transporter (Foster, 1979; Kinney, 1979; Foster, 1987; Foster, 1990). A second misidentification of the Salmonella pncC gene occurred when a selection for NMN catabolism mutants identified a gene (aphA) with a metabolic activity required for NMN uptake, not the catabolic enzyme NMN amidohydrolase; the periplasmic AphA is required for the de-phosphorylation of NMN to form nicotinamide riboside, the PnuC transporter substrate (Cheng, 1995; Grose, 2005).	b2700
mltB	None	membrane-bound lytic murein transglycosylase B	Enzyme; Murein sacculus, peptidoglycan	Membrane-bound lytic transglycosylase B, murein hydrolase; periplasmic OM-attached lipoprotein; Slt35, soluble lytic transglycosylase	MltB is an endolytic transglycosylase and an exolytic transglycosylase that can degrade both non-crosslinked and crosslinked murein chains (Lee, 2013). MltB cleaves the glycosidic bonds between the N-acetylmuramic acid and N-acetylglucosamine residues in murein. Slt35 is a soluble form of MltB with the lipid-anchored N-terminus cleaved after Phe39 during purification. The N-terminus of Slt35 has been identified by protein sequencing, but Slt35 is is an artifact of proteolysis during purification. The first 18 aa of MltB are a type II signal peptide.	b2701
gltI	ybeJ, yzzK	glutamate/aspartate periplasmic binding protein	Transport; Amino acids	Glutamate/aspartate binding protein, periplasmic; DEBP; part of GltJKLI ABC transporter	otherPDB (S. flexneri): 2VHA. Although the GltI PDB structure is derived from E. coli strain Shigella flexneri 2a str. 301, there are only three amino acid differences from the K-12 GltI (Hu, 2008).	b0655
rihA	ybeK	ribonucleoside hydrolase 1	Orf; Not classified	Ribonucleoside hydrolase, pyrimidine specific	Null	b0651
ycaK	None	putative NAD(P)H-dependent oxidoreductase	Null	Predicted NAD(P)H oxidoreductase	Null	b0901
yccJ	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Uncharacterized protein	YccJ is the prototype for a family of proteins of unknown function (Pfam PF13993).	b1003
yggM	None	DUF1202 family putative secreted protein	Phenotype; Not classified	DUF1202 family predicted periplasmic protein; function unknown	The first 21 aa of YggM are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. 	b2956
yggN	ecfF	DUF2884 family putative periplasmic protein	Null	DUF2884 family predicted periplasmic protein; function unknown	The first 20 aa of YggN are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b2958
ygbE	None	DUF3561 family inner membrane protein	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Inner membrane protein, DUF3561 family, function unknown	Null	b2749
ybcI	None	DUF457 family inner membrane protein	Null	DUF457 family inner membrane protein	Null	b0527
yedI	None	DUF808 family inner membrane protein	Null	Function unknown; homolog of V. cholerae mutK	Null	b1958
yedJ	None	putative HD superfamily phosphohydrolase	Null	Predicted HD superfamily phosphohydrolase, function unknown	Null	b1962
luxS	ygaG	S-ribosylhomocysteine lyase	Null	S-ribosylhomocysteine lyase, autoinducer 2 (AI-2) synthesis; functions in quorum sensing; acid-inducible	E. coli luxS is capable of inducing V. harveyi luminescence. The products of LuxS are homocysteine and the AI-2 precursor 4,5-dihydroxy-2,3-pentadione (DPD). DPD is unstable and reacts with water to form AI-2, a hydroxymethylfuran. LuxS may be involved in the recycling of S-adenosylhomocysteine. LuxS also makes AI-3. LuxS is regulated by cyaR sRNA (De Lay, 2009).	b2687
yddG	None	aromatic amino acid exporter	Null	Aromatic amino acid exporter	Overproduction of YddG confers resistance to phenyalanine and increases export of phenylalanine, tyrosine and tryptophan (Doroshenk, 2007). The yddG promoter region binds FNR (Federowicz, 2014). YddG belongs to the EamA/RhaT transporter family, DMT superfamily.	b1473
dxr	ispC, yaeM	1-deoxy-D-xylulose 5-phosphate reductoisomerase	Putative transport; Not classified	1-deoxy-D-xylulose 5-phosphate (DXP) reductoisomerase, NAPDH-dependent; also called 2-C-methyl-D-erythritol 4-phosphate (MEP) synthase; alternative nonmevalonate (DXP) pathway for terpenoid biosynthesis; dimeric	Null	b0173
mug	dug, ygjF	G/U mismatch-specific DNA glycosylase; xanthine DNA glycosylase	Null	Uracil DNA glycosylase, G:U mismatch-specific, dsDNA-specific; xanthine DNA glycosylase; excises uracil and xanthine from DNA by base flipping mechanism; required for mutation avoidance in stationary phase; up-regulated in stationary phase	The wild type Mug is active against all xanthine-containing DNA including single-stranded DNA and Mug has a more robust activity against xanthine than against uracil (Lee, 2010). Endonuclease IV stimulates Mug activity in vitro by promoting disassociation from the DNA and enzyme turnover (Sung, 2000). Mug can also excise a damaged basepair, epsilonC:G, containing 3,N(4)-ethenocytosine. Native Mug has been confirmed using mass spectrometry: 18670 daltons obs. vs 18673 calc. indicating that the initial Met is not clipped (Sung, 2000).	b3068
patA	ygjG	putrescine:2-oxoglutaric acid aminotransferase, PLP-dependent	Putative enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Arginine	Putrescine:2-oxoglutaric acid aminotransferase; putrescine aminotransferase	PatA(YgjG) and PatD(Prr,YdcW) form an alternative to the Puu pathway converting putrescine to gamma-aminobutyric acid (Samsonova, 2005). PatA(YgjG) also transaminates cadaverine and spermidine. A mutation was isolated, mapped to 89' and named pat that has 10% of wildtype putrescine aminotransferase activity (Shaibe, 1985). To distinguish the original pat gene which has not yet been mapped to an ORF from the structural patA gene it is refered to as patB(pat); perhaps the patB(pat) mutation affects PAT activity either indirectly or as a regulator. patA(ygjG) is regulated by RpoN and RpoS (Schneider, 2013; Kim, 2014). The patA(ygjG)-aer divergent operon promoter region binds ArcA and ArcA represses patA(ygjG) expression (Federowicz, 2014).	b3073
ygjH	None	putative tRNA binding protein; putative tRNA corner chaperone	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Probable tRNA binding protein; putative tRNA corner chaperone; putative tRNA ligase co-factor	YgjH is homologous to the methionyl tRNA ligase dimerization appendix.	b3074
ygjI	ebgB	putative transporter	Orf; Not classified	Putative transporter, function unknown; localized to inner membrane	APC superfamily. A protein of observed MW 79K was expressed from the DNA downstream of ebgC and postulated as EbgB, a protein of unknown function in the ebg operon, based on polar effects (loss of band) of ebgA mutations. YgjI(EbgB) could be the transporter for the unknown native substrate of wildtype EgbAB. Since the predicted MW of YgjI is 52K, it is possible that the membrane protein migrates anomalously.	b3078
ygjJ	None	putative periplasmic protein	Null	Predicted periplasmic protein, function unknown	The first 24 aa of YgjJ are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. YgjJ orthologs not widely distributed outside of E. coli but there are a few, demonstrating conservation.	b3079
ygjK	None	alpha-glucosidase	Enzyme; Not classified	Alpha-glucosidase activity, role unknown	The first 22 aa are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. YgjK binds glucose, mannose, and galactose and hydrolyzes nigerose, trehalose and maltooligosaccharides, with low activities (Kurakata, 2008). Glycoside hydrolase family 63.	b3080
fadH	ygjL	2,4-dienoyl-CoA reductase, NADH and FMN-linked	Orf; Not classified	2,4-dienoyl CoA reductase, NADPH-dependent	FadH contains FMN, FAD, and a 4Fe-4S cluster.	b3081
higA	ygjM	antitoxinof the HigB-HigA toxin-antitoxin system	Null	Antitoxin for HigB toxin	The crystal structure of E. coli CFT073 YddM has been determined (PDB 2ICP AND 2ICT) but it is identical (94/94) to the YddM sequence of MG1655; the YddM structure is misidentified as the structure of the related paralog HigA antitoxin (Arbing, 2010). PF01381 family.	b3082
higB	ygjN	mRNA interferase toxin of the HigB-HigA toxin-antitoxin system	Null	mRNA interferase, toxin-antitoxin pair HigBA	Null	b3083
rlmG	rsmD, ygjO	23S rRNA m(2)G1835 methyltransferase, SAM-dependent	Enzyme; rRNA modification	23S rRNA m(2)G1835 methyltransferase, SAM-dependent	RlmG methyltransferase mutants have a disadvantage in competitve growth cultures with wild type (Sergiev, 2006). The rsmD gene name usage was based on an erroneous prediction that RlmG was a small subunit modification enzyme (Bujnicki, 2002).	b3084
ygjP	None	putative metal dependent hydrolase	Null	Function unknown	Null	b3085
ygjQ	None	DUF218 superfamily protein	Null	DUF218 superfamily protein, function unknown; SanA paralog	ydcF and elyC(ycbC) (COG1434) and sanA and ygjQ (COG2949) are four members of the DUF218 superfamily (PF02698).	b3086
ygjR	None	putative NAD(P)-dependent dehydrogenase	Null	Predicted oxidoreductase, function unknown	Null	b3087
alx	ygjT	putative membrane-bound redox modulator	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative membrane-bound redox modulator, alkali-induced riboswitch; inner membrane protein	Alx is predicted to be a membrane-bound redox modulator (Stancik, 2002). alx is preceded by an alkali-induced riboswitch that was previously annotated as a stand-alone sRNA gene known as psrN (psrA14, sraF, tpk1) (Nechooshtan, 2009). The putative psrN sRNA gene (EG31161) has been removed as a stand-alone gene and is now annotated as the alx 5' UTR.	b3088
sstT	ygjU	sodium:serine/threonine symporter	Putative transport; Not classified	Na+/serine (threonine) symporter	The sstT promoter region binds ArcA and ArcA activates sstT expression (Federowicz, 2014).	b3089
ygjV	None	Imp-YgjV family inner membrane protein	Null	Imp-YgjV family inner membrane protein, function unknown	Null	b3090
uxaA	ygjW	altronate hydrolase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	D-altronate hydrolase (hydratase), Fe(2)-requiring; galacturonate branch of hexuronate pathway	ExuR regulon. UxaA is paralogous to GarD and contains a conserved CxxS redox motif. The unprocessed tisB pre-mRNA functions as an antisense RNA regulator of uxaA, resulting in cleavage of uxaA mRNA at the antisense site and also reciprocal cleavage and activation of the tisB pre-mRNA (forming the +42 tisB RNA) (Weel-Sneve, 2008).	b3091
uxaC	ygjX, ygjY, ygjZ	uronate isomerase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Uronate isomerase; galacturonate branch of hexuronate pathway	Null	b3092
exuT	None	hexuronate transporter	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	Hexuronate permease, for glucuronate and galacturonate	ExuT has 12 TM regions. Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS). ExuR regulon.	b3093
exuR	None	hexuronate regulon transcriptional repressor; autorepressor	Regulator; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Hexuronate regulon transcriptional repressor; autorepressor; D-tagaturonate- and D-fructuronate-inducible	ExuR is an HTH GntR-type DNA-binding transcriptional regulator.	b3094
yqjA	ecfL	general envelope maintenance protein; DedA family inner membrane protein	Membrane; inner membrane; cell division	General envelope maintenance protein, DedA family protein; inner membrane protein	A yqjA yghB double mutant is sensitive to biocides and cationic compounds known to be exported by multidrug efflux transporters MdfA, EmrE and Acr; this hypersensitivity is exacerbated by mutations in mdfA, emrE and acrB; all double mutant phenotypes are suppressed by an mdfA clone; E39 and D51 of YqjA and YghB are required for complementation of the drug-sensitivity phenotypes (Kumar, 2014). One of the redundant function proteins YqjA or YghB is required for general envelope maintenance and for PMF homeostasis under various growth conditions (Sikdar, 2012). A yqjA yghB double mutant has a membrane defect causing a cell division defect at low temperatures and an osmoremedial growth defect at elevated temperatures (Thomkins, 2008). DedA superfamily proteins YqjA and YghB likely have redundant functions since only a double mutant has defects; DedA superfamily members yabI or yohD can complement the yqjA yghB double mutant when overproduced, but a dedA clone cannot complement (Thompkins, 2008). DedA family. A yqjA yghB double mutant is defective in the Tat-dependent export of AmiA and AmiC (Sikdar, 2009). A yqjA yghB double mutant is complemented by the sole dedA family gene in B. burgdorferi bb0250 (Liang, 2010). The E. coli K-12 DedA superfamily (SNARE associated Golgi protein/PF09335) has eight paralogs in two families, the COG0586 DedA/YghB family (including the DedA/YabI/YohD subfamily and the general envelope maintenance protein YghB/YqjA subfamily) and the YdjX family (including the COG0398 YdjX/YdjZ subfamily and the COG1238 YqaA subfamily) (Doerrler, 2013; K.E.R.).	b3095
mzrA	ecfM, yqjB	modulator of EnvZ/OmpR regulon	Null	Modulator of EnvZ/OmpR regulon; links EnvZ/OmpR to the CpxAR two-component system regulon; inner membrane protein; binds EnvZ	MrzA was isolated as a multicopy suppresor of the temperature and antibiotic sensitivity of a bamB degP double deletion strain (Gerken, 2009).	b3096
yqjC	None	DUF1090 family putative periplasmic protein	Null	DUF1090 family predicted periplasmic protein, function unknown; expressed protein	The first 20 aa of YqjC are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b3097
yqjD	None	membrane-anchored ribosome-binding protein	Null	Membrane-anchored ribosome-binding protein, function unknown	YqjD is anchored to the inner membrane by its C-terminus and binds 70S and 100S ribosomes at its N-terminus; overproduction of YqjD inhibits growth; YqjD is expressed in stationary phase, YqjD expression is rpoS-dependent, and YjqD may sequester ribosomes to the inner membrane during stationary phase (Yoshida, 2012). DUF883 family. RpoS regulon. YgaM, ElaB and YqjD are paralogs predicted to have C-terminal inner membrane anchors (Luirink, 2011). YqjD may be ribosome associated (Jiang, 2007).	b3098
yqjE	None	DUF1469 family inner membrane protein	Null	Inner membrane protein, DUF1469 family, function unknown	Null	b3099
yqjF	None	putative quinol oxidase subunit	Null	Predicted membrane protein, function unknown; homologous to membrane oxidoreductase subunits	YphA and YqjF are paralogs. DoxX/SURF4 domain.	b3101
yqjG	None	putative S-transferase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Probable GSH transferase; disulfide-bond reductase	YqjG has modest disulfide-bond reductase activity (Branch, M.C. and Armstrong, R.N., unpublished results cited in Stourman, 2011). 7/107 YqjG peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed (Maillet, 2007).	b3102
yhaH	None	DUF805 family inner membrane protein,	Putative carrier; Not classified	DUF805 family inner membrane protein, function unknown	Null	b3103
yhaI	None	DUF805 family inner membrane protein	Putative carrier; Not classified	DUF805 family inner membrane protein, function unknown	Null	b3104
yhaJ	None	LysR family putative transcriptional regulator	Putative regulator; Not classified	LysR-family transcriptional regulator, function unknown	Null	b3105
yhaK	None	redox-sensitive bicupin	Null	Redox-sensitive bicupin, function unknown; may be an in vivo sensor of oxidative stress	Yhak is a low abudance protein. yhhW and yhaK are paralogs, and homologs of human Pirin nuclear protein. YhaK lacks quercetinase and peroxidase activity; Yhak has a redox sensitive Cys122 that can be oxidized to sulfenic acid; YhaK has two chloride atoms (Gurmu, 2008). A yhaK deletion mutant of E. coli CFT073 has altered biofilm formation and is up-regulated during biofilm formation (Hancock, 2010).	b3106
yhaL	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Function unknown	Null	b3107
yhaM	yhaN	putative L-serine dehydratase alpha chain	Null	Predicted L-serine dehydratase alpha chain	Upregulated by GSNO in defined medium (aerobic). SDH-alpha family. The three L-serine dehydratases SdaA, SdaB, and TdcG have both alpha and beta domains; there are no orphan beta domains to pair with YhaM.	b4470
yhaO	None	putative transporter	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative amino acid:H+ symport permease, function unknown	HAAAP family. Upregulated by GSNO in defined medium. yhaO translation is activated the FNR-regulated FnrS sRNA (Boysen, 2010).	b3110
tdcG	yhaP, yhaQ	L-serine dehydratase 3, anaerobic	Null	L-serine dehydratase 3, anaerobic; also known as serine deaminase; L-SD3	Null	b4471
tdcF	yhaR	putative reactive intermediate deaminase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Putative reactive intermediate deaminase, UPF0076 family; trimeric; reaction intermediate detoxification	RidA(YjgF), RutC, TdcF, YoaB and YjgH are paralogs and members of a highly conserved RidA(YjgF) family (pfam:PF01042) with diverse mutant phenotypes; the family members form homotrimers, some binding 2-ketoglutarate or related compounds, and all are probably reactive intermediate deaminases. The rat homolog PSP (perchloric acid-soluble protein) has been reported to have endoribonuclease activity, Endoribonuclease L, against ss mRNA, inhibiting translation.	b3113
tdcE	yhaS	pyruvate formate-lyase 4/2-ketobutyrate formate-lyase	Putative enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Pyruvate formate-lyase/ketobutyrate formate-lyase	HT_Cmplx9_Cyt: GcrA(YfiD)+TdcE.	b3114
garP	yhaU	putative (D)-galactarate transporter	Null	Probable D-galactarate transporter, membrane protein	Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS).	b3127
yhaV	None	toxin of the SohB(PrlF)-YhaV toxin-antitoxin system	Null	Toxin of the SohB(PrlF)-YhaV toxin-antitoxin pair; non-specific ribonuclease; autoregulator	Null	b3130
agaR	yhaW	transcriptional repressor of the aga regulon	Regulator; Not classified	aga regulon transcriptional repressor	Null	b3131
kbaZ	agaZ, yhaX	tagatose 6-phosphate aldolase 1, kbaZ subunit	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Ketose bisphosphate aldolase KbaYZ subunit; required for full activity and stability of KbaY	Part of aga cluster.	b3132
agaV	yhaY	N-acetylgalactosamine-specific enzyme IIB component of PTS	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Amino sugars	Enzyme IIB Nag, PTS system; N-acetylgalactosamine-specific enzyme IIB; EIIB-Nag	Null	b3133
agaW'	yhaZ	pseudogene, N-acetylgalactosamine-specific enzyme IIC component of PTS	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Amino sugars	Pseudogene, N-terminal fragment, PTS system EIICGalNAc; N-acetylgalactosamine-specific	Remnant of aga operon deletion that removed agaEF and parts of agaW and agaA. 2304 bp deleted, as compared to O157:H7 and E. coli C, as originally noted by Brinkkotter et al. (2000). Deletion was presumably formed by recombination between two perfect six bp direct repeats, GCGACC. A complete AgaW sequence is in E. coli O157:H7 as Z4486.	b3134
agaA'	yraA	pseudogene, N-acetylgalactosamine-6-phosphate deacetylase fragment	Null	Pseudogene, C-terminal fragment, GalNAc-6-P deacetylase; N-acetyl-D-galactosamine-6-phosphate deacetylase	Remnant of aga operon deletion that removed agaEF and parts of agaW and agaA. 2304 bp deleted, as compared to O157:H7 and E. coli C, as originally noted by Brinkkotter et al. (2000). Deletion was presumably formed by recombination between two perfect six bp direct repeats, GCGACC. A complete AgaA is in E. coli O157:H7, as Z4489. The Z4489 2nd ATG start for agaA is more likely.	b3135
agaS	yraB	tagatose-6-phosphate ketose/aldose isomerase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Tagatose-6-phosphate ketose/aldose isomerase	Null	b3136
kbaY	agaY, kba, yraC	tagatose 6-phosphate aldolase 1, kbaY subunit	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	Ketose 1,6-bisphosphate aldolase, class II; D-tagatose 1,6-bisphosphate aldolase; requires KbaZ subunit for full activity and stability	Part of aga cluster. kbaY, gatY, fbaA and ydjI are paralogs.	b3137
agaB	yraD	N-acetylgalactosamine-specific enzyme IIB component of PTS	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Amino sugars	Putative PTS system N-acetylgalactosamine-specific enzyme IIB component 	Null	b3138
agaC	yraE	N-acetylgalactosamine-specific enzyme IIC component of PTS	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Amino sugars	Enzyme IIC Nag, PTS system; N-acetylgalactosamine-specific enzyme IIC; EIIC-Nag	Null	b3139
agaD	yraF	N-acetylgalactosamine-specific enzyme IID component of PTS	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Amino sugars	Enzyme IID Nag, PTS system; N-acetylgalactosamine-specific enzyme IID; EIID-Nag; remnant of aga operon	Null	b3140
agaI	yraG	galactosamine-6-phosphate isomerase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Galactosamine-6-phosphate isomerase	Null	b3141
yraH	None	putative fimbrial-like adhesin protein	Putative structural component; Surface structures	 FimA homolog, function unknown	YraH is one of 25 FimA homologs in E. coli K-12. The first 22 aa of YraH are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b3142
yraI	None	putative periplasmic pilin chaperone	Putative factor; Surface structures	Predicted periplasmic pilus chaperone, function unknown	YraI has Ig-like domains: pfam PF00345 aligns to N-terminal residues 25-142, and pfam PF02753 aligns to C-terminal residues 149-227. The first 23 aa of TraI are a predicted type I signal peptide.	b3143
yraJ	None	putative outer membrane protein	Putative membrane; Not classified	Putative outer membrane fimbrial subunit export usher protein; function unknown	FimD family. The first 40 aa of YraJ are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. YraJ lacks the N-terminal Cys pair conserved in most usher proteins.	b3144
yraK	None	putative fimbrial-like adhesin protein	Putative structural component; Surface structures	 FimA homolog, function unknown	YraK is one of 25 FimA homologs in E. coli K-12. The first 21 aa of YraK are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b3145
rsmI	yraL	16S rRNA C1402 2'-O-ribose methyltransferase, SAM-dependent	Enzyme; rRNA modification	16S rRNA C1402 2'-O-ribose methyltransferase, SAM-dependent	RsmH and RsmI are responsible for the N(4), 2'-O-dimethylcytidine (m(4)Cm) modifications at position 1402 of the Escherichia coli 16S rRNA (Kimura, 2009). rsmI(yraL) deletion mutants are reported to form small colonies by Arigoni(1998) and normal colonies by Dassain(1999). RsmI(YraL) is homologous to the C-terminal methyltransferase domain of CysG.	b3146
lpoA	yraM	OM lipoprotein stimulator of MrcA transpeptidase	Factor; Not classified	OM lipoprotein stimulator of MrcA transpeptidase	LpoA binds to and stimulates PBP1A (MrcA) to synthesize more peptidoglycan (murein) (Paradis-Bleau, 2010; Typas, 2010; Young, 2010). The first 26 aa of LpoA are predicted to be a type II signal peptide. LppC family.	b3147
yraN	None	UPF0102 family protein	Null	Function unknown, UPF0102 family	Null	b3148
diaA	yraO	DnaA initiator-associating factor for replication initiation	Null	DnaA-binding protein; involved in the timing of the initiation of DNA replication; dnaA(Cs) suppressor; homodimer	Null	b3149
yraP	ecfH	outer membrane lipoprotein	Putative transport; Not classified	OM lipoprotein, function unknown, mutant is SDS-sensitive	RpoE regulon. yraP is an osmY paralog. The first 18 aa of YraP are a type II signal peptide. HT_Cmplx43_Mem: DcrB+MoaB+OsmE+Slp+YajG+YraP.	b3150
yraQ	None	putative inner membrane permease	Null	Function unknown	Null	b3151
yraR	None	putative nucleoside-diphosphate-sugar epimerase	Null	Predicted nucleoside-diphosphate-sugar epimerase, function unknown	Null	b3152
yhbO	None	stress-resistance protein	Null	Stress-resistance protein, protease homolog	A yhbO mutant is sensitive to heat, oxidative, hyperosmotic, pH, and UV stresses (Abdallah, 2007). No activity detected on peptidase substrates. Mutants are sensitive to multiple stress conditions. YhbO belongs to a protein family variously called the C56 peptidase family, the PfpI/HchA peptidase/chaperone family, or the DJ-1/PARK7 superfamily. YhbO is induced by salt stress aerobically (Weber, 2006).	b3153
yhbP	None	UPF0306 family protein	Null	Function unknown, UPF0306 family	Null	b3154
yhbQ	None	GIY-YIG nuclease superfamily protein	Null	Function unknown, GIY-YIG nuclease superfamily	Null	b3155
yhbS	None	GNAT family putative N-acetyltransferase	Null	GNAT family putative N-acetyltransferase	The yhbTS-yhbUV divergent operon promoter region binds FNR and yhbTS operon expression is activated by FNR (Federowicz, 2014).	b3156
yhbT	None	SCP-2 sterol transfer family protein	Null	COG3154 family predicted lipid carrier protein	The yhbTS-yhbUV divergent operon promoter region binds FNR and yhbTS operon expression is activated by FNR (Federowicz, 2014).	b3157
yhbU	None	U32 peptidase family protein	Orf; Not classified	U32 peptidase family protein, function unknown, 	The yhbTS-yhbUV divergent operon promoter region binds FNR and yhbUV operon expression is activated by FNR (Federowicz, 2014). ydcP, yegQ, yhbU, and yhbV are paralogs.	b3158
yhbV	None	U32 peptidase family protein	Null	U32 peptidase family protein, function unknown, 	The yhbTS-yhbUV divergent operon promoter region binds FNR and yhbUV operon expression is activated by FNR (Federowicz, 2014). ydcP, yegQ, yhbU, and yhbV are paralogs.	b3159
yhbW	None	putative luciferase-like monooxygenase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Putative luciferase-like monooxygenase, function unknown	yhbW is a multicopy suppressor of rpoE mutant lethality (Hayden, 2008). YhbW belongs to the luciferase-like monooxygenase family (Pfam PF00296).	b3160
yhbX	None	putative EptAB family phosphoethanolamine transferase, inner membrane protein	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Putative EptAB family phosphoethanolamine transferase, inner membrane	yhbX mutants (mislabeled as ybhX) do not have defects in LPS structure as determined by mass spectrometery, indicating that YhbX modifies a substrate other than LPS (Klein, 2013).	b3173
yhbY	None	RNA binding protein associated with pre-50S ribosomal subunits	Null	UPF0044 family RNA binding protein; associated with pre-50S ribosomal subunits; functions in ribosome assembly	YhbY is a ribosome-associated protein (Jiang, 2007). YhbY has been found to be associated with the ribosomal 50S subunit in sucrose gradients (Jiang, 2006). YhbY is similar to IF3 C-terminal RNA binding fold. Single CRM domain protein.	b3180
obgE	cgtA, obg, yhbZ	GTPase involved in cell partioning and DNA repair	Putative factor; Not classified	DNA-binding GTPase involved in cell partioning and DNA repair; involved in ribosome assembly; GTP-bound form associates with 50S ribosomal subunits; ribosome-associated SpoT ppGpp-degradation stimulator	obgE mutants have a lowered DnaA concentration and an elevated basal level of the alarmone ppGpp. ObgE is required for phage lambda development. ObgE binds ppGpp and modulates the stringent response (Persky, 2009). Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004). ObgE(CgtA) binds SpoT and pre-50S ribosomes, ObgE(CgtA) increases ppGpp degradation by ribosome-associated SpoT, and an obgE(cgtA) mutant has an elevated ppGpp level during growth, but not during the RelA-dependent stringent response (Jiang, 2007).	b3183
ibaG	yrbA	acid stress protein; putative BolA family transcriptional regulator	Null	Acid stress protein; predicted transcriptional regulator, BolA family; low abundance protein	A ibaG(yrbA) mutant is sensitive to acid stress; ibaG(yrbA) transcription is induced by acid stress; overexpression of IbaG(YrbA) improves acid resistance (Guinote, 2012). Overexpression of ibaG(yrbA), which is paralogous to the morphogene bolA, is toxic; an insertion in the upstream gene mlaB(yrbB) can be deleterious due to increased expression of ibaG(yrbA), which is why the non-essential mlaB(yrbB) gene does not have a kan insertion in the Keio collection (Malinverni, 2009). grxD mutations are synthetic lethal with mutations in the isc operon, suggesting that Grx4 is involved in an alternative FeS cluster assembly pathway; a similar synthetic lethality pattern was observed for the bolA-like gene ibaG(yrbA), but not for bolA (Butland, 2005).	b3190
mlaB	yrbB	ABC transporter maintaining OM lipid asymmetry, cytoplasmic STAS component	Transport; Transport of small molecules: phospholipids	Probable phospholipid ABC transporter, quinolone resistance; peripheral membrane protein, cytoplasmic; maintains OM lipid asymmetry; STAS subunit	MlaB may interact with MlaE to influence MlaE localization and activity; mlaB and mlaE orthologs are fused in some bacterial genomes, indicating they may interact. STAS domains are found fused to transport domains in sulfate transporters, are found in some anti-sigma factors, and may bind NTPs. Mutations in any one of the mla genes confers sensitivity to SDS-EDTA and lead to accumulation of phospholipid in the outer leaflet of the OM (Malinverni, 2009). MlaABCDEF is a predicted ABC import system that probably maintains outer membrane lipid asymmetry by retrograde import of phospholipids from the outer leaflet of the OM; mla defects are suppressed by overexpression of the pldA gene encoding an OM phospholipase that removes outer leaflet phospholipids under stress conditions (Malinverni, 2009). Overexpression of ibaG(yrbA), which is paralogous to the morphogene bolA, is toxic; an insertion in the upstream gene mlaB(yrbB) can be deleterious due to increased expression of ibaG(yrbA), which is why the non-essential mlaB(yrbB) gene does not have a kan insertion in the Keio collection (Malinverni, 2009). Mutations in mlaB have a hyperlethality phenotype when cells are stressed; MlaB is a protein that reduces the lethal effects of stress (Han, 2010).	b3191
mlaC	yrbC	ABC transporter maintaining OM lipid asymmetry, periplasmic binding protein	Transport; Transport of small molecules: phospholipids	Putative phospholipid-binding protein, periplasmic; may deliver phospholipids to MlaFEDB ABC transporter for import; maintains OM lipid asymmetry by retrograde import of lipids from the OM outer leaflet	Mutations in any one of the mla genes confers sensitivity to SDS-EDTA and lead to accumulation of phospholipid in the outer leaflet of the OM (Malinverni, 2009). MlaABCDEF is a predicted ABC transporter import system that probably maintains outer membrane lipid asymmetry by retrograde import of phospholipids from the outer leaflet of the OM; mla defects are suppressed by overexpression of the pldA gene encoding an OM phospholipase that removes outer leaflet phospholipids under stress conditions (Malinverni, 2009). The first 21 aa are predicted to be a Type I signal peptide. MlaC probably delivers phospholipids to the MlaFEDB ABC transporter, which has the additional MlaD putative periplasmic binding protein signal-anchored to the membrane.	b3192
mlaD	vpsC(S.f.), yrbD	OM lipid asymmetry maintenance protein; membrane-anchored ABC family periplasmic binding protein	Transport; Transport of small molecules: phospholipids	Putative phospholipid-binding protein, signal-anchored; periplasmic; MlaFEDB phospholipid ABC transporter; maintains OM lipid asymmetry	Mutations in any one of the mla genes confers sensitivity to SDS-EDTA and lead to accumulation of phospholipid in the outer leaflet of the OM (Malinverni, 2009). MlaABCDEF is a predicted ABC import system that probably maintains outer membrane lipid asymmetry by retrograde import of phospholipids from the outer leaflet of the OM; mla defects are suppressed by overexpression of the pldA gene encoding an OM phospholipase that removes outer leaflet phospholipids under stress conditions (Malinverni, 2009). A 28 aa signal anchor facilitates export, but the signal sequence is not cleaved, anchoring MlaD to the periplasmic face of the inner membrane (Malinverni, 2009). MlaD(YrbD) is encoded in an operon with ABC transporter homologs and is predicted to be an IM-anchored periplasmic phospholipid binding protein; the predicted periplasmic phospholipid-binding protein MlaC may chaperone the deliver of phospholipids to MlaD. Alternatively, MlaD may assist in docking the putative MlaC-PL complex to the MlaEF core transporter for direct transfer of PLs to the inner membrane. An mlaD(yrbD) mutation in Shigella is sensitive to SDS and affects virulence protein secretion (Hong, 1998).	b3193
mlaE	vpsB(S.f.), yrbE	ABC transporter maintaining OM lipid asymmetry, inner membrane permease protein	Transport; Transport of small molecules: phospholipids	Probable phospholipid ABC transporter permease; MlaFEDB phospholipid ABC transporter; maintains OM lipid asymmetry	Mutations in any one of the mla genes confers sensitivity to SDS-EDTA and lead to accumulation of phospholipid in the outer leaflet of the OM (Malinverni, 2009). MlaABCDEF is a predicted ABC import system that probably maintains outer membrane lipid asymmetry by retrograde import of phospholipids from the outer leaflet of the OM; mla defects are suppressed by overexpression of the pldA gene encoding an OM phospholipase that removes outer leaflet phospholipids under stress conditions (Malinverni, 2009). The Shigella vspABC(mlaFED) genes influence virulence protein secretion and intercellular spreading in the host (Hong, 1998). mlaE(yrbE) is required for swarming motility (Inoue, 2007).	b3194
mlaF	vpsA(S.f.), yrbF	ABC transporter maintaining OM lipid asymmetry, ATP-binding protein	Transport; Transport of small molecules: phospholipids	Probable ABC phospholipid transporter ATP-binding protein; MlaFEDB phospholipid ABC transporter; maintains OM lipid asymmetry	Mutations in any one of the mla genes confers sensitivity to SDS-EDTA and lead to accumulation of phospholipid in the outer leaflet of the OM (Malinverni, 2009). MlaABCDEF is a predicted ABC import system that probably maintains outer membrane lipid asymmetry by retrograde import of phospholipids from the outer leaflet of the OM; mla defects are suppressed by overexpression of the pldA gene encoding an OM phospholipase that removes outer leaflet phospholipids under stress conditions (Malinverni, 2009). An mlaD(yrbD) mutation in Shigella is sensitive to SDS and affects virulence protein secretion (Hong, 1998).	b3195
yrbG	None	putative calcium/sodium:proton antiporter	Null	Function unknown, similiar to Na+/Ca++ exchangers	YrbG has duplicate domains with opposite topologies.	b3196
kdsD	yrbH	D-arabinose 5-phosphate isomerase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	D-arabinose 5-phosphate isomerase; LPS biosynthesis	KdsD is homologous to SrlQ and KpsF. A kdsD srlQ double mutant is a synthetic lethal.	b3197
kdsC	yrbI, yrbJ	3-deoxy-D-manno-octulosonate 8-phosphate phosphatase	Null	3-deoxy-D-manno-octulosonate 8-phosphate phosphatase; KDO 8-P phosphatase; LPS biosynthesis; HAD22	YrbI is renamed as KdsC (personal comm., R.W. Woodard, Univ. of Mich.). KdsC native N-terminal sequence is from E. coli B. Cloned kdsC is from BL21. KdsC is tetrameric and requires a divalent metal cofactor. HAD superfamily.	b3198
lptC	yrbK	periplasmic membrane-anchored LPS-binding protein; LPS export protein	Null	Periplasmic membrane-anchored LPS-binding protein; LPS export	An LptBFGC protein complex has been identified (Narita, 2009). LptC binds LPS in vitro and LptA can displace LPS from LptC, but not the reverse, consistent with an LPS export pathway (Tran, 2010). Depletion of LptC results in rifampicin/bile salts sensitivity, indicative of an outer membrane integrity defect (Sperandeo, 2006). LptC has an uncleaved signal anchor tethering periplasmic LptC to the inner membrane (Sperandeo, 2007, Tran, 2010). The failure to produce a viable deletion strain indicates that lptC is an essential gene (Baba, 2006). LptB has been reported to be essential based on depletion of ara-controlled expression (Sperandeo, 2006). The insertion of a minitransposon with an ara-inducible outward promoter at codon 134 of lptC(yrbK) has been reported to be viable but to exhibit a cold-sensitive growth phenotype, possibly due to poor ara-inducible expression of the downstream essential lptA(yhbN) gene (Serina, 2004).	b3199
yrbL	None	Mg(2+)-starvation-stimulated protein	Null	Mg(2+)-starvation-stimulated gene, function unknown	Mg(2+) stimulon-PhoPQ regulon, EvgAS-PhoPQ cascade enhanced-expression subset.	b3207
mtgA	mgt, yrbM	biosynthetic peptidoglycan transglycosylase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Monofunctional peptidoglycan glycosyltransferase; monofunctional biosynthetic peptidoglycan transglycosylase; GTase; TGase	MtgA has flavomycin-resistant peptidoglycan synthesis activity (Di Berardino, 1996; Derouaux, 2007). mtgA is a non-essential gene (Schiffer, 1999). MtgA localizes to the division site and interacts with FtsW, FtsN, and FtsI in mcrA(Ts) mrcB- strains, indicating a role for MtgA in peptidoglycan synthesis related to the cell cycle (Derouaux, 2007). The use of the term transglycolase is ambiguous as it can describe both lytic and synthetic peptidoglycan activities, therefore glycosyltransferase is preferred (Di Berardino, 1996). MtgA lacks a penicillin binding domain and therefore is penicillin-insensitive. MtgA is a membrane-bound periplasmic enzyme that has an uncleaved signal anchor (Di Berardino, 1996). MtgA may be the glycan polymerase characterized by Hara (1984), although it has an apparent MW larger than MtgA (Di Berardino, 1996).	b3208
yhcC	None	putative Fe-S oxidoreductase, Radical SAM superfamily protein	Null	Predicted Fe-S oxidoreductase, Radical SAM superfamily protein; function unknown	The yhcC-gltBDF divergent operon promoter region binds ArcA (Federowicz, 2014).	b3211
yhcD	None	putative outer membrane fimbrial subunit usher protein	Putative membrane; Not classified	Predicted outer membrane fimbrial subunit usher protein, function unknown	FimD family. The first 21 aa of YhcD are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b3216
yhcE'	None	pseudogene fragment	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction, interrupted by IS5R	IS5R inserted at codon 123 and made a 4 bp target site duplication TTAG. Salmonella typhimurium has an uninterrupted homolog (NCBI gi 16423137). The first 19 aa are predicted to be a signal peptide.	b4569
yhcF	None	putative transcriptional regulator	Putative regulator; Not classified	Predicted secreted protein, function unknown; gltF paralog	The first 20 aa of YhcF are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b3219
yhcG	None	DUF1016 family protein in the PD-(D/E)XK nuclease superfamily	Null	DUF1016 family protein in the PD-(D/E)XK nuclease superfamily	The predicted nuclease domain of PD-(D/E)XK nuclease superfamily member YhcG has diverged or degenerated (Kosinski, 2005).	b3220
yhcH	None	DUF386 family protein, cupin superfamily	Putative enzyme; Not classified	DUF386 family protein, cupin superfamily; required for swarming phenotype	EbgC is a distant homolog of YiaL, YhcH and TabA(YjgK), all four match PF04074; although homologous to the beta subunit of the EbgAC evolved beta-galactosidase, no potential EbgA-like alpha subunit partners are apparent for the other three DUF386 family proteins. otherPDB (H. influenzae): 1JOP, 1S4C. The H. influenzae structures reveals a likely active site, proposed to be a copper-dependent sugar isomerase. yhcH is the last gene in the nanATEK-yhcH operon, but is not required for growth on sialic acid (Plumbridge, 1999).	b3221
nanK	yhcI	N-acetylmannosamine kinase	Putative regulator; Not classified	N-acetyl-D-mannosamine (ManNAc) kinase	NanK has low level glucokinase activity.	b3222
nanE	yhcJ	putative N-acetylmannosamine-6-P epimerase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Probable N-acetylmannosamine-6-phosphate 2-epimerase	NanE is not predicted to be a lipoprotein by LipOP or PATOSEQ, but is listed in DOLOP as a putative lipoprotein. Although the Cys is conserved, none of the homologs are predicted by LipoP to be a lipoprotein, so it is likely not to be a lipoprotein. NanE was just below the PATOSEQ cutoff for a lipoprotein prediction.	b3223
nanR	yhcK	sialic acid-inducible nan operon repressor	Regulator; Not classified	Repressor of the nan operon, induced by sialic acid; homodimeric	NanR is a GntR-type DNA-binding transcriptional regulator.	b3226
dcuD	yhcL	putative transporter	Putative transport; Not classified	Predicted transporter, DcuC paralog, function unknown; mutant has no phenotype and dcuD does not complement dcuC mutations	IT (Ion Transporter) superfamily (Prakash, 2003). ST(3) structural class based on hydropathy profile (Lolkema, 2003).	b3227
zapE	yhcM	divisome ATPase	Enzyme; Not classified	Divisome ATPase	The divisome ATPase ZapE is recruited late to the Z-ring and alters FtsZ polymerization in vitro; a zapE null mutant forms filamentous cells at high temperature and grows poorly anaerobically (Marteyn, 2014).	b3232
yhcN	None	cadmium and peroxide resistance protein, stress-induced	Null	Cadmium and peroxide resistance protein, stress-induced	A yhcN mutant strain is sensitive to hydrogen peroxide and cadmium, overproduces biofilm, and displays reduced degradation of cis-dichloroethylene (Lee, 2009). A yhcN deletion mutant in E. coli CFT073 has reduced motility and altered biofilm formation (Hancock, 2010). A 22 aa signal peptide cleavage and periplasmic localization of YhcN have been experimentally verified, Mitchell, R., Del Campo, M., Hus, N. and Rudd, K.E., unpublished results. EvgAS regulon. YhcN family.	b3238
yhcO	None	putative barnase inhibitor	Null	Predicted barnase inhibitor	Barnase is a potent secreted RNase from B. amyloliquefaciens. Intracellular barnase is toxic but a barnase inhibitor, called barstar, binds to and inhibits barnase intracellularly. Barnase is a member of the N1/T1 family of RNases and E. coli does not have a member of this family so it is unclear what the barstar homolog YhcO function is.	b3239
aaeB	yhcP	p-hydroxybenzoic acid efflux system component	Null	AaeAB p-hydroxybenzoic acid efflux pump PET component; efflux protein family	AaeAB also exports related aromatic carboxylic acids. The aaeB gene is paralogous to ydhK.	b3240
aaeA	yhcQ	p-hydroxybenzoic acid efflux system component	Null	AaeAB p-hydroxybenzoic acid efflux pump MFP component; membrane fusion protein	AaeAB also exports related aromatic carboxylic acids. The aaeA gene is paralogous to ydhJ. Mutants in aaeA(yhcQ) have antibiotic-sensitve biofilms, and may be down-regulated in hepA(rapA) mutants which have a similar phenotype (Lynch, 2007).	b3241
aaeX	yhcR	DUF1656 family putative inner membrane efflux pump associated protein	Null	Predicted inner membrane DUF1656 family protein; efflux pump associated; function unknown	YtcA, AaeX and YdhI are DUF1656 family (Pfam PF07869) predicted inner membrane proteins; all these E. coli DUF1656 family proteins are encoded in the first genes of known or predicted efflux pump operons, preceding the membrane fusion protein genes.	b3242
aaeR	qseA, yhcS	transcriptional regulator for aaeXAB operon	Null	Transcriptional activator for the aaeXAB operon	LysR family. Activated by LuxS and AI-2 autoinducer in O157:H7. AaeR activates ler in E. coli O157:H7.	b3243
tldD	yhdO	putative peptidase	Phenotype; Not classified	Probable peptidase required for the maturation and secretion of the antibiotic peptide MccB17; involved in CcdA antidote degradation; tolerance for effects on DNA gyrase by sex factor F gene letD	4/64 TldD peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed (Maillet, 2007).	b3244
yhdP	yhdQ, yhdR	DUF3971-AsmA2 domains protein	Null	DUF3971-AsmA2 domains protein	YhdP shares a C-terminal domain with AsmA. YhdP has a predicted 29 aa signal anchor.	b4472
ybaM	None	DUF2496 family protein	Null	DUF2496 family protein	Null	b0466
yhdT	None	DUF997 family putative inner membrane protein	Null	DUF997 family predicted inner membrane protein; function unknown	Null	b3257
yhdU	None	putative membrane protein	Null	Function unknown	Null	b3263
yhdV	None	putative outer membrane protein	Null	Novel verified lipoprotein, function unknown	The first 16 aa of YhdV are a type II signal peptide.	b3267
yhdW'	None	pseudogene, ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein family	Putative transport; Not classified	Pseudogene reconstruction; ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein family	An apparent frameshift mutation at codon 23, as compared to other alleles and homologs of this gene, is translated as H23 in the reconstructed protein sequence since this position is a His residue in all the intact E. coli alleles. Putative ABC transporter YhdWXYZ has an unknown substrate and yhdW' is an apparent pseudogene. The first 24 aa are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b3268
yhdX	None	putative amino acid ABC transporter permease	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative amino acid ABC transporter permease protein	Putative ABC transporter YhdWXYZ has an unknown substrate and yhdW' is an apparent pseudogene.	b3269
yhdY	None	putative amino acid ABC transporter permease	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative amino acid ABC transporter permease protein	Putative ABC transporter YhdWXYZ has an unknown substrate and yhdW' is an apparent pseudogene.	b3270
yhdZ	None	putative amino acid ABC transporter ATPase	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative amino acid ABC transporter ATPase	Putative ABC transporter YhdWXYZ has an unknown substrate and yhdW' is an apparent pseudogene.	b3271
yrdA	None	bacterial transferase hexapeptide domain protein	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Bacterial transferase hexapeptide domain protein; function unknown, low abundance protein	The observed MW of YrdA is 19 kDa, consistent with the ALT_INIT. YrdA is related to gamma class carbonic anhydrases, but does not possess significant carbonic anhydrase activity (Park, 2012). YrdA is a member of the hexapeptide repeat acetyltransferase superfamily. yrdA is paralogous to paaY and caiE. 1/89 YrdA peptide masses from MS analysis indicate that an upstream start codon at -72 is utilized, but the upstream sequences are not conserved and the reported cleavage of the initial Met, which is followed by a Lys, is unusual; in addition, the observed MW is inconsistent with the 72 aa extension (Maillet, 2007).	b3279
yrdB	None	DUF1488 family protein	Null	DUF1488 family protein, function unknown	Null	b3280
tsaC	rimN, yrdC	tRNA(ANN) t(6)A37 threonylcarbamoyladenosine modification protein, threonine-dependent ADP-forming ATPase	Enzyme; tRNA modification	tRNA(NNU) t(6)A37 threonylcarbamoyladenosine modification; threonine-dependent ADP-forming ATPase	The modified tRNA nucleotide t(6)A37 is derived from the labile cyclized ct(6)A37 during extraction; the tRNA threonylcarbamoyladenosine dehydratase TcdA catalyzes the cyclization reaction (Miyauchi, 2013). TsaBCDE are necessary and sufficient for tRNA(NNU) t(6)A37 threonylcarbamoyladenosine modification in vitro (Deutsch, 2012). TsaC(YrdC) has in vitro threonine-dependent ATPase activity generating AMP (Deutsch, 2012). TsaD(YgjD) was proposed to be a threonine-bicarbonate ligase producing N-carbamoylthreonine which was proposed to then be transferred to the N(6) group of tRNA(NNU) A37 by TsaC(YrdC) (El Yacoubi, 2011). TsaC(YrdC) but not paralog YciO is required for synthesis of t(6)A37 threonylcarbamoyladenosine of ANN decoding tRNA(NNU)s (El Yacoubi, 2009). TsaA paralog YciO does not complement a tsaC(yrdC) mutational defect in t(6)A37 synthesis (Gerdes, 2011). TsaC(YrdC) efficiently binds to unmodified but not modified uncharged tRNA (El Yacoubi, 2009; Harris, 2011). TsaC(YrdC) was proposed to be a threonylcarbamoyl transferase subunit and part of a heteromultimeric complex as it binds unmodified tRNA, threonine and ATP (Harris, 2011). A tsaC(yrdC) deletion suppresses a prfA mutation and can only survive in a prfA mutant. tsaC(yrdC) mutants were observed to be defective in ribosome maturation and was named rimN, but this could be a secondary effect due to its essential role in tRNA(NNU) t(6)A37 modification (Kaczanowska, 2005).	b3282
yrdD	None	ssDNA-binding protein, function unknown	Putative enzyme; Not classified	ssDNA-binding protein, function unknown; zinc finger domain protein	Zinc-bound YrdD binds ssDNA and protects it from DNase I digestion; iron-bound YrdB does not bind ssDNA (Cheng, 2014). An insertion in yrdD suppresses the severe growth defect of a rdgB recA double mutant, indicating that YrdD might be involved in the removal of non-canonical DNA precursors (Budke, 2010). YrdD has three copies of a DNA-binding zinc finger motif (PF01396) also found in the C-terminal domain of topoisomerase I (Tse-Dinh, 1988; Ahumada, 1998; Finn, 2013).	b3283
ybjC	None	DUF1418 family protein	Null	DUF1418 family protein, function unknown, 	ybjC is the first gene in the ybjC-nfsA operon. SoxS regulon.	b0850
ybaN	None	DUF454 family inner membrane protein	Orf; Not classified	DUF454 family inner membrane protein	Null	b0468
yefM	None	antitoxin of the YoeB-YefM toxin-antitoxin system	Null	Antitoxin for YoeB toxin; binds YoeB RNase-like domain	Homologous to phage P1 Phd antitoxin and Enterococcus faecium antitoxin, Axe. Induced during biofilm formation. yefM-yoeB is the only toxin-antitoxin pair involved in Lon dependent lethality.	b2017
ygbF	cas2	CRISPR adaptation ssRNA endonuclease	Null	Predicted ssRNA endonuclease Cas2, CRISPR adaptation protein	ygbT(cas1) and ygbF(cas2) are required for efficient adaptation, the process of inserting foreign plasmid or phage DNA into a CRISPR array to prevent future attacks (Yosef, 2012). YgbF(Cas2) belongs to the Pfam PF09707 family; six other PF09707 family members have been shown to be novel ssRNA endonucleases with ferrodoxin-like folds that cut U-rich regions (Beloglazova, 2008).	b2754
yfaL	yfaF, yfaJ, yfaK	adhesin	Putative transport; Not classified	Probable OM autotransporter adhesin; overexpression increases adhesion and biofilm formation	The yfaL-nrdAByfaE divergent operon promoter region binds FNR (Federowicz, 2014). YfaL has been adapted for surface display cloning and the regions required for surface display were determined (Ko, 2012). An apparently cleaved fragment of YfaL has been observed in a Western blot that may be a C-terminal passenger domain (Marani, 2006). YfaL is an AidA homolog.	b2233
ybeL	None	DUF1451 family protein	Phenotype; Not classified	DUF1451 family protein	A fraction of full length YbeL is naturally ssrA-tagged. YbeL may have an ATPase-related function since it appears to be distantly related to domains in the ClpB ATPase subunit and adenylate kinases (K.E.R., unpublished PSI-BLAST observations).	b0643
abgT	ydaH	p-aminobenzoyl-glutamate transporter; membrane protein	Putative transport; Not classified	p-Aminobenzoyl-glutamate transporter; membrane protein	Artificial expression of abgT allows the uptake of p-aminobenzoyl-glutamate (Hussein, 1998; Carter, 2007). abgAB expression catalyzes the p-aminobenzoyl-glutamate assimilation to feed p-aminobenzoate auxotrophs (Carter, 2007). The abg operon is silent and an AbgR inducer has not been found, suggesting another natural substrate (Hussein, 1998; Carter, 2007). IT (Ion Transporter) superfamily (Prakash, 2003). ST(3) structural class based on hydropathy profile (Lolkema, 2003).	b1336
ybgF	None	periplasmic TolA-binding protein	Null	TolA-binding protein, periplasmic, function unknown; TPR domain; trimeric; last gene in tolB-pal operon; secAB-dependent cleavage/secretion; no phenotype of kan insertion	YbgF trimers undergo an oligomeric change upon binding to TolA, forming a 1:1 complex (Krachler, 2010). The first 26 aa of ybgF are predicted to be type I signal peptide. ybgF and bamD are distant paralogs.	b0742
matP	ycbG	Ter macrodomain organizer matS-binding protein	Factor; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	Ter macrodomain organizer matS-binding protein	MatP binds to the MATS(matS) family of 13-mers in the chromsome terminus region and matP mutants have defects in cell division in rich media (Mercier, 2009). Anchoring of the Ter macrodomain at mid-cell is mediated by MatP binding to ZapB (Espéli, 2012). UPF0268 family.	b0956
yfiM	None	putative lipoprotein	Null	Required for salt suppression of motility and lambda growth; probable lipoprotein, Cys conserved	Mutants in yfiM are defective for phage lambda growth (Maynard, 2010). Mutations in yfiM have increased motility in the presence of high [NaCl], which normally suppresses motility (Girgis, 2007). First 14 aa are predicted to be a type II signal peptide.	b2586
opgD	mdoD, ydcG, yzzZ	OPG biosynthetic periplasmic protein	Putative structure; Not classified	OPG biosynthetic periplasmic protein	The opg genes were originally called mdo because the osmoregulated periplasmic glucans (OPGs) were originally called membrane-derived oligosaccharides. Verified Tat substrate: OpgD(MdoG) has a Tat/Sec (Class II) 32 aa signal peptide (Tullman-Ercek, 2007).	b1424
yebK	hexR(P.a.)	putative DNA-binding transcriptional regulator	Null	Function unknown; P. aeruginosa homolog represses zwf transcription	Null	b1853
yecF	None	DUF2594 family protein	Null	DUF2594 family protein	Flagellar regulon. The yecF gene can be transcribed in vitro with sigma28 (FliA) holoenzyme (Yu, 2006). Enterobacterial-only gene.	b1915
uspC	yecG	universal stress protein	Putative regulator; Not classified	Stress-induced protein; UV-resistance	Null	b1895
yecH	None	DUF2492 family protein	Null	DUF2492 family protein	The yecH promoter region binds FNR and yecH expression is activated by FNR (Federowicz, 2014). Conserved Cys and His residues in the yecH family suggest a metal-binding function. YecH was identified as a binding partner for IscS, possibly indicating a role for YecH in iron-sulfur cluster formation (Arifuzzaman, 2006).	b1906
ydcH	None	DUF465 family protein	Null	DUF465 family protein, function unknown	Null	b1426
proQ	yebJ, yobE, yoeC	RNA chaperone, putative ProP translation regulator	Null	RNA chaperone, probable regulator of ProP translation	ProQ has an N-terminal FinO-like domain is a high-affinity RNA binding domain and the C-terminal Hfq-like domain is required for RNA strand exchange and duplexing; ProQ does not affect transcription of proP and probably regulates ProP translation (Chaulk, 2011).	b1831
ampH	yaiH	D-alanyl-D-alanine-carboxypeptidase/endopeptidase; penicillin-binding protein; weak beta-lactamase	Enzyme; Murein recycling	D-alanyl-D-alanine-carboxypeptidase/endopeptidase; peptidoglycan recycling or remodeling; penicillin-binding protein; very weak beta-lactamase	The DD-endopeptidase activity of AmpH predominates in vitro and is 10- to 100-fold higher on natural substrates than the DD-carboxypeptidase activity; AmpH can act on the pentapeptide-rich macromolecular peptidoglycan in sacculi prepared from a multiple DD-carboxypeptidase mutant (González-Leiza, 2011). Although originally reported not to have beta-lactamase activity, a subsequent study demonstrated that AmpH has a very weak beta-lactamase activity using nitrocefin as the substrate; this activity is about 0.1% of the rate for AmpC, a known weak beta-lactamase (Henderson, 1997; González-Leiza, 2011). A cleavable 21 aa type I signal peptide for AmpH is strongly predicted by SignalP and cleavage at this site has been confirmed by mass loss observed using LC-MS, although since the mature N-terminus was not sequenced AmpH is not in the Verified Set; the 23 aa cleaved N-terminal sequence reported includes the N-terminal MG dipeptide added by the pET vector (González-Leiza, 2011). AmpH is firmly membrane-anchored and needs a strong detergent treatment to solubilize, however no transmembrane segments are predicted (González-Leiza, 2011).	b0376
yciN	None	DUF2498 protein YciN	Null	DUF2498 family protein	Null	b1273
ybfK	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Uncharacterized protein, function unknown	A full length YbfK homolog can be found in the bacterial genome of Enterobacter cloacae SCF1, although it is unannotated: MSQTPPVRLLAMSRICQGERCWLQANACTSKIQEDLYAKAPVVGRLPGIKEVKVKTIAVGKHHDVCCPPYVGHSSAVVFHFVYL.	b4590
ycjF	None	UPF0283 family inner membrane protein	Null	UPF0283 family inner membrane heat shock protein; function unknown	YcjF has been shown to be a heat shock protein and to be in the RpoH regulon (Nonaka, 2006; Rasouly, 2009). YcjF is induced during an unfolded protein response initiated with canavanine treatment (Rasouly, 2009).	b1322
yajI	None	putative lipoprotein	Null	Probable lipoprotein, function unknown; Cys conserved	The first 19 aa of YajI are predicted to be a type II signal peptide.	b0412
ybhC	None	acyl-CoA thioesterase, lipoprotein	Putative enzyme	Acyl-CoA thioesterase, verified lipoprotein; physiological role unknown	First 21 aa are a type II signal peptide.	b0772
tusE	yccK	mnm(5)-s(2)U34-tRNA 2-thiolation sulfurtransferase	Orf; Not classified	mnm(5)-s(2)U34-tRNA 2-thiolation step sulfurtransferase; binding partner linking TusBCD to MnmA; may transfer sulfur first to MnmA or directly to tRNA	Null	b0969
stfP	ycfK	e14 prophage; uncharacterized protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Predicted tail fiber protein, e14 prophage; alternate virion-host specificity protein; Tail Collar domain	The first 96 codons of StfP encode the shared Stf constant region that is fused to the StfE' variable region in the P-element P(-) orientation (Plasterk, 1985; Mehta, 2004). The C-terminal 113 codons encoding the StfP variable region become the stfP' pseudogene in the P(-) orientation.	b1154
zapA	ygfE	FtsZ stabilizer	Null	FtsZ stabilizer, coiled-coil protein	ZapA binding promotes FtsZ polymer bundling and inhibits the GTPase activity of FtsZ (Small, 2007). Overexpression causes filamentous biofilm formation. Divisome protein, non-essential. FtsN has been shown by FRET to directly interact with itself, FtsW, FtsI and ZapA (Alexeeva, 2010). ZapA has been shown by FRET to directly interact with itself, FtsN, FtsZ and FtsI (Alexeeva, 2010). 5/23 ZapA(YgfE) peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed (Maillet, 2007).	b2910
ybcJ	None	ribosome-associated protein; putative RNA-binding protein	Null	Ribosome-associated protein, function unknown; predicted RNA binding protein	YbcJ is a ribosome-associated protein (Jiang, 2007).	b0528
yfiN	None	putative membrane-anchored diguanylate cyclase	Null	Predicted membrane-anchored diguanylate cyclase	YfiN has an N-terminal predicted periplasmic domain flanked by two TM segments and has a C-terminal cytoplasmic diguanylate cyclase GGDEF domain. The N-terminal domain is probably a signal input domain because there is a HAMP linker signal transduction domain (residues 183-236) between the periplasmic domain and the GGDEF domain. The HAMP linker signal transduction domain is detected using EBI's InterProScan as matching ProSite PS50885, as annotated in UniProtKB P46139, but has an insignificant match to a HAMP linker Pfam profile (PF00672, E=0.15) using NCBI's CD-Search. The P. aeruginosa ortholog YfiN is an inner membrane-associated diguanylate cyclase whose activity is negatively regulated by the periplasmic protein YfiR; the P. aeruginosa OM lipoprotein YfiB counteracts YfiR inhibition of YfiN; P. aeruginosa YfiN regulates exopolysaccharide production (Malone, 2010). YfiR may interact with the predicted N-terminal periplasmic domain of YfiN.	b2604
yfaH'	None	pseudogene	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction, C-terminal fragment, LysR homolog	An intact full length version of YfaH (292 aa) is Z3495 in E. coli O157:H7.	b2238
gss	gsp	glutathionylspermidine amidase and glutathionylspermidine synthetase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Polyamine biosynthesis	Glutathionylspermidine synthase/amidase; bifunctional protein	Gss, YgiC and YjfC are ATP-Grasp family proteins with ATPase activities, but only Gss has glutathionylspermidine synthase activity (Sui, 2012). Gss has an N-terminal CHAP (cysteine, histidine-dependent amidohydrolases/peptidases) amidase domain (Bateman, 2003). The gsp gene name has been changed to gss to avoid conflicts with gspA-O. The physiological role of Gss is unknown.	b2988
pitB	None	phosphate transporter	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Anions	Cryptic low-affinity Pi transport protein	Null	b2987
gspF	hofF, hopF	general secretory pathway component, cryptic	Putative transport; Not classified	Part of H-NS-silenced gsp-alpha (T2SS-alpha) divergon, type II protein secretion; cloned gsp-alpha (T2SS-alpha) divergon secretes ChiA, requires gspAB operon	A divergon is a regulon comprised of two adjacent divergent operons or genes.	b3327
gspG	hofG, hopG	pseudopilin, cryptic, general secretion pathway	Putative transport; Not classified	Pseudopilin in H-NS-silenced gsp divergon, type II secreton; cloned gsp divergon secretes ChiA	gspG complements a P. aeruginosa pulG mutation. GspG is processed by GspO when both are expressed. Overexpression causes filamentous biofilm formation. A divergon is a regulon comprised of two adjacent divergent operons or genes.	b3328
gspH	hofH, hopH	putative general secretory pathway component, cryptic	Putative transport; Not classified	Part of H-NS-silenced gsp-alpha (T2SS-alpha) divergon, type II protein secretion; cloned gsp-alpha (T2SS-alpha) divergon secretes ChiA, requires gspAB operon	A divergon is a regulon comprised of two adjacent divergent operons or genes.	b3329
gspA	yheD	general secretory pathway component, cryptic	Putative transport; Not classified	Part of H-NS-silenced gsp-alpha (T2SS-alpha) divergent operons; type II protein secretion; cloned gsp-alpha (T2SS-alpha) divergent operons secretes ChiA, requires gspAB operon	GspA is homologous to exeA of A. hydrophila, which is required for protein export, specifically for the export and assembly of secretin (ExeD/GspD) into the outer membrane. GspA has an N-terminal predicted cytoplasmic domain with an ATP/GTP binding motif, a single predicted transmembrane segment (239-261), followed by a predicted periplasmic domain with a predicted C-terminal peptidoglycan-binding motif (407-467; Pfam PG_binding_1). GspA may interact with GspB. A divergon is a regulon comprised of two adjacent divergent operons or genes. Overexpression causes a decrease in the amount of biofilm formed and decreases motility.	b3323
gspC	yheE	general secretory pathway component, cryptic	Putative transport; Not classified	Part of H-NS-silenced gsp-alpha (T2SS-alpha) divergon, type II protein secretion; cloned gsp-alpha (T2SS-alpha) divergon secretes ChiA, requires gspAB operon	A divergon is a regulon comprised of two adjacent divergent operons or genes.	b3324
gspD	yheF	general secretory pathway component, cryptic	Putative transport; Not classified	Part of H-NS-silenced gsp-alpha (T2SS-alpha) divergon, type II protein secretion; cloned gsp-alpha (T2SS-alpha) divergon secretes ChiA, requires gspAB operon	A divergon is a regulon comprised of two adjacent divergent operons or genes.	b3325
gspE	yheG	general secretory pathway component, cryptic	Putative transport; Not classified	Part of H-NS-silenced gsp-alpha (T2SS-alpha) divergon, type II protein secretion; cloned gsp-alpha (T2SS-alpha) divergon secretes ChiA, requires gspAB operon	gspE, hofB and yggR are paralogs. A divergon is a regulon comprised of two adjacent divergent operons or genes.	b3326
gspI	yheH	general secretory pathway component, cryptic	Putative transport; Not classified	Part of H-NS-silenced gsp-alpha (T2SS-alpha) divergon, type II protein secretion; cloned gsp-alpha (T2SS-alpha) divergon secretes ChiA, requires gspAB operon	A divergon is a regulon comprised of two adjacent divergent operons or genes.	b3330
gspJ	yheI	putative general secretory pathway component, cryptic	Putative transport; Not classified	Part of H-NS-silenced gsp-alpha (T2SS-alpha) divergon, type II protein secretion; cloned gsp-alpha (T2SS-alpha) divergon secretes ChiA, requires gspAB operon	A divergon is a regulon comprised of two adjacent divergent operons or genes.	b3331
gspK	yheJ	general secretory pathway component, cryptic	Putative transport; Not classified	Part of H-NS-silenced gsp-alpha (T2SS-alpha) divergon, type II protein secretion; cloned gsp-alpha (T2SS-alpha) divergon secretes ChiA, requires gspAB operon	A divergon is a regulon comprised of two adjacent divergent operons or genes.	b3332
gspL	yheK	general secretory pathway component, cryptic	Putative transport; Not classified	Part of H-NS-silenced gsp-alpha (T2SS-alpha) divergon, type II protein secretion; cloned gsp-alpha (T2SS-alpha) divergon secretes ChiA, requires gspAB operon	A divergon is a regulon comprised of two adjacent divergent operons or genes.	b3333
tusB	yheL	mnm(5)-s(2)U34-tRNA synthesis 2-thiolation protein	Null	2-thiolation step of mnm(5)-s(2)U34-tRNA synthesis; sulfur relay system; required for swarming phenotype	In TusBCD complex, which mediates sulfur transfer from TusA to TusBCD binding partner TusE.	b3343
tusC	yheM	mnm(5)-s(2)U34-tRNA synthesis 2-thiolation protein	Null	2-thiolation step of mnm(5)-s(2)U34-tRNA synthesis; sulfur relay system; required for swarming phenotype	In the TusBCD complex, which mediates sulfur transfer from TusA to TusBCD binding partner TusE. TusB, TusD and YchN are paralogs of the Pfam PF02635 family.	b3344
tusD	yheN	sulfurtransferase for 2-thiolation step of mnm(5)-s(2)U34-tRNA synthesis	Null	mnm(5)-s(2)U34-tRNA 2-thiolation step sulfurtransferase; sulfur relay system; C78 accepts persulfide sulfur from C19 of TusA, then probably donates to C108 of TusE; required for swarming phenotype	In the TusBCD complex, which mediates sulfur transfer from TusA to TusBCD binding partner TusE. TusB, TusD and YchN are paralogs of the Pfam PF02635 family.	b3345
yheO	None	putative PAS domain-containing DNA-binding transcriptional regulator	Null	Predicted PAS domain DNA-binding transcriptional regulator; function unknown	YheO is the prototype for the N-terminal YheO-like PAS domain (PF08348) and has a C-terminal HTH_22 (PF13309) DNA-binding domain. yheO is the first gene in the yheO-tusDCB operon and may regulate operon expression. mnm5s2U is detected in a yheO deletion strain (Ikeuchi, 2006).	b3346
fkpA	yzzS	FKBP-type peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase (rotamase)	Enzyme; Proteins - translation and modification	Periplasmic peptidylprolyl cis,trans isomerase; heat shock inducible; PPIase-independent chaperone activity, binds FK506	An fkpA, surA, ppiB, ppiD quadruple mutant is viable (Justice, 2005). FkpB is required for colicin M toxicity (Hullman, 2008).	b3347
lpxP	ddg	palmitoleoyl-acyl carrier protein (ACP)-dependent acyltransferase	Enzyme; Not classified	Lipid A synthesis, KDO2-lipid IVA palmitoleoyl-ACP acyltransferase; cold temperature inducible	Null	b2378
kefG	yheR	potassium-efflux system ancillary protein for KefB, glutathione-regulated	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Potassium-efflux system ancillary protein for KefB; glutathione-regulated	KefG member of the quinone oxidoreductase family.	b3351
yheS	None	ABC-F family protein predicted regulatory ATPase	Putative transport; Not classified	ABC-F family putative regulatory ATPase, function unknown	Production and export to the periplasm of recombinant scFv-PhoA hybrid antibody was improved in a yheS mutant. 7/120 YheS peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is not removed (Maillet, 2007).	b3352
yheT	None	UPF0017 family putative hydrolase	Null	UPF0017 family protein, function unknown; predicted alpha/beta fold hydrolase	YheT is predicted to have an alpha/beta fold found in many hydrolases (Zhang, 1998). 	b3353
yheU	None	UPF0270 family protein	Null	UPF0270 family protein	Null	b3354
yhfK	None	putative transporter, FUSC superfamily inner membrane protein	Null	Putative transporter, FUSC superfamily inner membrane protein, tandem domains	Null	b3358
yhfL	None	small lipoprotein	Null	Novel verified lipoprotein, function unknown	The first 19 aa of YhL are a type II signal peptide.	b3369
frlA	yhfM	putative fructoselysine transporter	Putative transport; Not classified	Predicted fructoselysine transporter	Null	b3370
frlB	yhfN	fructoselysine-6-P-deglycase	Putative transport; Not classified	Fructoselysine 6-phosphate deglycase	Null	b3371
frlC	yhfO, yhfP	fructoselysine 3-epimerase	Null	Fructoselysine 3-epimerase; interconverts fructoselysine and psicoselysine, allowing psicoselysine catabolism via the frl pathway	The putative frameshift that disrupted yhfO into two ORFs has been re-sequenced in K-12 and has now been corrected (E. Van Shaftin, personal comm.) fusing yhfO and the old yhfP into one new ORF, renamed as frlC. The "C" at position 3500308 has been removed. The Genbank entry U00096 now also has this correction, and the previous ALT_INIT, so the frlC status is OK now.	b4474
frlD	yhfQ	fructoselysine 6-kinase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Fructoselysine 6-kinase	FrlD has weak activity with the substrate fructosevaline and is also called fructosamine 6-kinase (Kojima, 2013).	b3374
frlR	yhfR	putative DNA-binding transcriptional regulator	Putative regulator; Not classified	Predicted regulator for fructoselysine operon yhfMNOQ; function unknown	Null	b3375
yhfS	None	FNR-regulated pyridoxal phosphate-dependent aminotransferase family protein	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Pyridoxal phosphate-dependent aminotransferase family protein; FNR-regulated; function unknown	YhfS is in the FNR regulon (Salmon, 2003).	b3376
yhfT	None	inner membrane protein	Putative transport; Not classified	Inner membrane protein, function unknown	YhfT is the prototype for a family of membrane proteins of unknown function (PF10797). 	b3377
yhfU	None	DUF2620 family protein	Null	DUF2620 family protein, function unknown	Null	b3378
php	yhfV	phosphotriesterase homology protein	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Phosphotriesterase homology protein; substrate unknown	Php is homologous to P. diminuta phosphotriesterase (28% identity) but has no phosphotriesterase activity when tested with a nonspecific model substrate; similarly no general phosphodiesterase, esterase, sulfatase, aminopeptidase, carbonic anhydrase, or phosphatase activities were detected for Php (Buchbinder, 1998). php is a multicopy suppressor of a pdxB deletion (Kim, 2010).	b3379
yhfW	None	phosphopentomutase-related metalloenzyme superfamily protein	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Phosphopentomutase-related metalloenzyme superfamily protein; function unknown	YhfW belongs to the metalloenzyme superfamily (InterPro IPR006124) and also matches the phosphopentomutase profile (InterPro IPR010045; Pfam PF01676).	b3380
yhfX	None	putative pyridoxal 5'-phosphate binding protein	Null	Putative pyridoxal 5'-phosphate binding protein; function unknown	YhfX and YggS are single domain proteins related to the N-terminal domains of both synthetic (Alr) and catabolic (DsdX) alanine racemases, which contain the covalently PLP-modified lysine residue N6-(pyridoxal phosphate)lysine; since YhfX and YggS lack the C-terminal Alr/DadX domains containing the L-alanine-specific binding site and proton-accepting active site, it is unlikely that these enzymes have alanine racemase activity. YhfX has a predicted covalently PLP-modified residue N6-(pyridoxal phosphate)lysine.	b3381
yhfY	None	PRD domain protein	Null	PRD domain protein, function unknown	YhfY is comprised of a single PTS Regulation and Dimerization (PRD) domain that is predicted to be phosphorylated by the sugar phosphotransferase system (PTS) in response to the availability of carbon source; the BglG anti-terminator and CsiE also have PRD domains. yhfY is the second gene in the yfhZY operon.	b3382
yhfZ	None	putative DNA-binding transcriptional regulator	Null	Predicted DNA-binding transcriptional regulator; function unknown	YhfZ is the prototype for the large (residues 75-301) C-terminal unknown function YhfZ domain profile (PF14503); the N-terminal domain (residues 25-71) of YhfZ is a predicted helix-turn-helix (HTH) domain matching the Pfam profile HTH_41 (PF14502). The YhfZ HTH domain also matches the Interpro winged HTH profile IPR011991. The YhfZ and HTH_41 domains are often found in association. yhfZ is the first gene in the yfhZY operon.	b3383
hofP	yrfA	DNA catabolic protein	Null	Required for the utilization of DNA as a carbon source; H. influenzae competence protein ComD homolog	Null	b3392
hofO	yrfB	DNA catabolic protein	Null	Required for the utilization of DNA as a carbon source; H. influenzae competence protein ComC homolog	Null	b3393
hofN	yrfC	DNA catabolic putative fimbrial assembly protein	Null	Required for the utilization of DNA as a carbon source; H. influenzae competence protein ComB homolog	Null	b3394
hofM	yrfD	DNA catabolic putative pilus assembly protein	Null	Required for the utilization of DNA as a carbon source; H. influenzae competence protein ComA homolog	hofM (yrfD)has been demonstrated to have a CRP-S promoter co-regulated by both Crp and Sxy (Cameron, 2006).	b3395
nudE	yrfE	adenosine nucleotide hydrolase; Ap3A/Ap2A/ADP-ribose/NADH hydrolase	Null	Adenosine nucleotide hydrolase; substrates include Ap3A, Ap2A, ADP-ribose, NADH	Ap3A is adenosine(5')triphospho(5')adenosine. The nudE-yrfF divergent operon promoter region binds ArcA and ArcA represses nudE expression (Federowicz, 2014).	b3397
yrfF	igaA(S.t.), mucM(S.t.), umoB(P.m.)	putative RcsCDB-response attenuator, inner membrane protein	Putative factor; Not classified	Putative RcsCDB-response attenuator; inner membrane protein	The Salmonella YrfF ortholog IgaA attenuates the envelope stress response of the RcsCDB signalling system; yrfF is essential unless rcsCDB is deleted (non-mucoid yrfF mutants) or RcsCDB colanic acid production is reduced to a non-lethal level by other suppressor mutations (mucoid yrfF mutants); the rcs genes and yrfF tend to co-occur in genomes, suggesting they function together (Mariscotti, 2008). An IS1 mutation in the promoter region of yrfF, which may cause a reduction but not elimination of YrfF, in the E. coli MC4100 K-12 strain causes mucoidy and macrophage-resistance (pathoadaptation) (Miskinyte, 2013). yrfF is classified as an essential gene in E. coli because of the inability to construct a deletion mutant of yrfF (Baba, 2006). As part of a global transposon footprinting, two insertions in yrfF were found, leading the authors to categorize yrfF as a non-essential gene; these insertions may still allow for a partially functional YrfF protein, or they may have acquired suppressor mutations reducing or eliminating colanic acid production (Gerdes, 2003). YrfF is related to UmoB(P.m.) which upregulates flhDC in P. mirabilis. The Salmonella yrfF ortholog igaA is also called mucM, due to its mucoid mutant phenotype. The nudE-yrfF divergent operon promoter region binds ArcA and ArcA activates yrfF expression (Federowicz, 2014).	b3398
yrfG	None	GMP/IMP nucleotidase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	GMP/IMP nucleotidase; physiological role unknown; HAD8	HAD superfamily. Activity demonstrated in vitro (Kuznetsova, 2006).	b3399
hslR	yrfH	ribosome-associated heat shock protein Hsp15	Null	Hsp15, a heat shock protein that binds free 50S subunits; binds RNA and DNA	Null	b3400
hslO	yrfI	heat shock protein Hsp33	Null	Hsp33, oxidative stress-induced heat shock chaperone; C-terminal zinc-binding motif regulates Hsp33 activity	masks the hydrophobic surfaces under reduced conditions, release of zinc during oxidative induced disulfide bond formation results in the unmasking of the hydrophobic surfaces and partial activation of chaperone function. The redox induced secondary structure changes are primarily localized in the C-terminus, leaving the N-terminus which harbors the dimerization interface largely unaltered.	b3401
yhgE	None	DUF4153 family putative inner membrane protein	Putative transport; Not classified	DUF4153 family predicted inner membrane protein, function unknown	The yhgE-pck divergent promoter region binds ArcA and yhgE expression is activated by ArcA (Federowicz, 2014).	b3402
yhgF	tex(B.p.)	putative transcriptional accessory factor; ionizing radiation survival protein; putative nucleic acid-binding protein	Putative factor; Not classified	Putative transcription accessory factor; ionizing radiation survival protein; putative nucleic acid-binding protein; low abundance protein	A yhgF mutation is one of many selected in a strain evolved for resistance to high levels of ionizing radiation; a single yhgF deletion mutant has about a ten-fold drop in survival after radiation exposure as compared to a yhgF+ strain (Byrne, 2014). yhgF expression is repressed during biofilm formation (Ren, 2004). The yhgF gene is orthologous to the essential B. pertussis tex (toxin expression) transcription factor gene that negatively regulates toxin production (Fuchs, 1996). YhgF is homologous to the essential yeast transcription elongation factor Spt6, which is conserved from yeast to humans, and the human ortholog has a role in HIV pathogenesis (Close, 2001). A high-throughput screen for new virulence factors identified the P. aeruginosa tex/yhgF gene as being required for rat lung infection (Potvin, 2003). The S. pneumoniae Tex/YhgF ortholog is not required for growth or pneumolysin expression; a tex/yhgF deletion mutant is out-competed by a wild type strain in culture; purified S. pneumoniae Tex/YhgF binds RNA and DNA (He, 2006). Purified C. perfringens Tex/YhgF binds a subset of toxin mRNAs and a tex deletion strain grows normally but has reduced toxin expression (Abe, 2010). Purified Tex/YhgF from P. aeruginosa binds ssDNA more than ten-fold tighter than it binds ssDNA, dsDNA or dsRNA but does not have nuclease activity; Tex/YhgF also binds a DNA/RNA hybrid; nucleic acid binding required the S1 domain although the weak binding to short ssRNAs indicates that the other potential nucleic acid binding domains also participate in nucleic acid binding; it appears that dsDNA binding by the variant HTH domain would be occluded by the rest of the protein although ssRNA-binding is possible (Johnson, 2008). YhgF is highly conserved; sequences, motifs, and structures identify six domains in the Tex family proteins, here defined by serial non-overlapping matches to five InterPro signatures; both the InterPro and the parent database profile accessions are provided: (1) a potential DNA-binding N-terminal HTH structural domain (IPR023319, CATH 1.10.10.650; residues 2-110), (2) a Tex-specific domain (IPR023323, CATH 1.10.3500.10; residues 111-322), (3) a YqgF/RNaseH-like domain that lacks a critical carboxylate active site residue but may still bind DNA/RNA hybrids (IPR012337; Superfamily SSF53098; residues 323-469), (4) tandem RuvA domain 2-like domains each with two potentially nucleic acid-binding helix-hairpin-helix motifs for a total of four HhH tandem motifs; the second HhH pair is not detected by any of the Pfam HhH family motifs and are not well-formed in the P. aeruginosa YhgF structures (IPR010994, Superfamily SSF47781; 470-558, 560-632), and (5) a highly conserved S1 domain with a nucleic acid-binding OB-fold (IPR012340, Superfamily SSF50249, 638-723). The N-terminal HTH domain of YhgF, which was identified in the crystal structure of P. aeruginosa YhgF but was not predicted by sequence analysis, is not similar to MtlR as previously proposed; the V. parahaemolyticus MtlR crystal structure reveals no HTH domain (Fuchs, 1996; Johnson, 2008; Tan, 2009). otherPDB(P. aeruginosa): 3BZC,3BZK (Johnson, 2008). otherPDB(P. aeruginosa): 2OCE (Jin, X., Min, T., Burley, S.K., and Shapiro, L., 2007, unpublished).	b3407
feoC	yhgG	putative DNA-binding transcriptional regulator	Null	Putative Fe-S-sensing transcriptional regulator for feoABC; required for full FeoB activity	Upregulated by GSNO in defined medium (anaerobic). FeoC role in ferrous iron uptake is undetermined, but requirement was demonstrated by Taudte, Ph.D. thesis, 2003, Martin Luther University, cited in Grass (2006). Fur regulon. FNR regulon.	b3410
gntX	yhgH	DNA catabolic protein	Null	Required for the utilization of DNA as a carbon source; H. influenzae competence protein ComF homolog	gntX does not have a role in gluconate metabolism (personal communication, T. Conway, 2000). gntX is predicted to have a CRP-S promoter co-regulated by both Crp and Sxy (Cameron, 2006).	b3413
nfuA	gntY, yhgI	Fe/S biogenesis protein, putative scaffold/chaperone protein	Null	Fe/S biogenesis protein; possible scaffold/chaperone for damaged Fe/S proteins	NfuA can transfer its [4Fe-4S] cluster into apo-aconitase AcnA and nfuA mutants have reduced survival to oxidative and iron stress (Angelini, 2008). nfuA(yhgI) is required for the utilization of DNA as a carbon source and is a H. influenzae competence protein ComG homolog (Palchevskiy, 2006). nfuA(gntY) does not have a role in gluconate metabolism (T.Conway, personal communication, 2000). iscA, sufA, and erpA are paralogs; nfuA is a possible HT gene with an N-terminal domain homologous to iscA and an additional thioredoxin-like C-terminal domain. IcsR regulon.	b3414
hrpA	None	putative ATP-dependent helicase	Enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	Predicted ATP-dependent RNA helicase	Null	b1413
rtcA	yhgJ, yhgK	RNA 3'-terminal phosphate cyclase	Enzyme; RNA synthesis, modification, DNA transcription	RNA 3'-terminal phosphate cyclase; 5' adenylyltransferase; physiological role unknown	The RtcA 5' adenylyltransferase activity might be involved with other pathways than the RNA 3'-terminal phosphate cyclase reaction (Chakravarty, 2010).	b4475
rtcB	yhgL	RNA-splicing ligase	Null	RNA-splicing ligase	RtcB is conserved in archaea, bacerial and eucaryotes. RtcB and RtcA are proposed to work together as heal and seal enzymes, respectively, of a RNA repair pathway (Tanaka, 2011). The human RtcB ortholog, HSPC117, is the essential subunit of a human tRNA splicing ligase complex (Popow, 2011). The archaeal RtcB is a component of tRNA maturation (Englert, 2011). UPF0027 family of ACR proteins.	b3421
ygaH	None	putative L-valine exporter, norvaline resistance protein	Null	Probable L-valine exporter, norvaline resistance	ygaZH mutants are hypersensitive to norvaline; YgaZH overproduction confers norvaline resistance (Park, 2007). YgaZH are homologus to the branched chain amino acid two-component export permease BrnEF of Corynebacterium glutamicum (Kennerknecht, 2002).	b2683
yhgN	None	UPF0056 family inner membrane protein	Null	UPF0056 family inner membrane protein, function unknown	The asd-yhgN divergent genes promoter region binds FNR (Federowicz, 2014). marC, ychE and yhgN are paralogs (Pfam PF01914).	b3434
yhhW	None	quercetinase activity in vitro	Null	Quercetinase activity, in vitro; physiological role unknown	YhhW is a low abundance protein. yhhW and yhaK paralogs, and homologs of human Pirin nuclear protein. YhhW has a bicupin fold, with an N-terminal metal coordination site.	b3439
yhhX	None	putative oxidoreductase 	Putative regulator; Not classified	Putative oxidoreductase, expressed protein; ydgJ paralog	4/162 YhhX peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is not removed (Maillet, 2007).	b3440
yhhY	None	aminoacyl nucleotide detoxifying acetyltransferase	Enzyme; Not classified	Aminoacyl nucleotide detoxifying acetyltransferase	YhhY can detoxify several non-hydrolysable aminoacyl adenylates (Kazakov, 2014). YhhY is a GNAT family accetyltransferase.	b3441
yhhZ	None	putative Hcp1 family polymorphic toxin protein; putative colicin-like DNase/tRNase activity	Null	Predicted Hcp1 family polymorphic toxin protein; predicted colicin-like DNase/tRNase activity	The C-terminal domain (271-349; PF12639) of YhhZ is predicted to be a colicin-like DNase/tRNase toxin domain possibly involved in intra-species inter-cellular growth inhibition; the Hcp1 domain is probably responsible for secreting the protein so that the C-terminal toxin domain can inhibit the growth of neighboring cells (Zhang, 2011). The N-terminal Hcp1 family domain (InterPro IPR017728) is predicted to form homohexameric rings and to be exported by means of a type IV secretion system (Mougous, 2006).	b3442
yrhA'	None	pseudogene, interrupted by IS1E	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction, interrupted by IS1E	IS1E interrupts yrhA after codon 127. An intact YrhA protein sequence was hypothetically reconstructed by removing the IS1E sequence and one copy of a nine base pair target site duplication (GACATTAAA). An intact allele is present in E. coli O6 (UniProtKB: Q8FCQ5). Homologous to SMR0202 of S. marcescens plasmid R478 (UniProtKB: Q6MXJ6) and YP0884 of Y. pestis (UniProtKB: Q8CKT0).	b3443
yrhB	None	stable heat shock chaperone	Factor; Adaptations, atypical conditions	Stable heat shock chaperone, monomeric	YrbH has high thermal and pH stability; YrbH has chaperone activity; YrbH prevents heat-induced aggregation of PurK; YrbH promoted the refolding of Udp; YrbH is increased during a 48C heat shock in an RpoH-independent manner in BL21; YrbH allows growth of BL21 at 48C; YrbH is an effective fusion partner for aggregation-prone proteins (Ahn, 2012). YrhB is predicted to be an immunity protein (Zhang, 2012).	b3446
yfdN	yzyA	CPS-53 (KpLE1) prophage; uncharacterized protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Uncharacterized protein, CPS-53/KpLE1 prophage	Closely related to orf-41 from bacteriophage SfV of Shigella flexneri.	b2357
yfdM'	yzyB	CPS-53 (KpLE1) prophage; putative methyltransferase	Phage or Prophage Related	Pseudogene, CPS-53/KpLE1 prophage; intact gene encodes a predicted DNA adenine methyltransferase	YfdM is identical to the first 89 of 217 residues of a verified DNA adenine methyltransferase from bacteriophage SfV of Shigella flexneri.	b2356
ynfM	yzyC	putative arabinose efflux transporter	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative arabinose efflux transporter	YnfM may be an arabinose efflux transporter because a ynfM mutant has increased intracellular arabinose, but not xylose; other compounds were not tested (Koita, 2012). A ynfLM clone conferred hypersensitivity to acriflavin, but a ynfM-alone expression clone did not, leading the authors to conclude that overexpression of the putative regulator YnfL was responsible for the Acr-S phenoptype. Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS). No overexpression drug resistance phenotypes were observed.	b1596
glcG	yghC	DUF336 family protein	Null	DUF336 family protein, function unknown	glcG is in the glg operon but a glgG mutation does not effect glycolate utilization (Pellicer, 1996).	b2977
yqjH	None	putative siderophore interacting protein	Null	Ferric-chelate reductase, NADPH-dependent; siderophore-interacting protein (SIP); nickel-resistance	Null	b3070
yqjI	None	PadR family putative transcriptional regulator	Null	Transcriptional repressor for yqjH, nickel- or iron-inducible; autorepressor	PadR family, winged-helix.	b3071
aer	air, yqjJ	fused signal transducer for aerotaxis sensory component/methyl accepting chemotaxis component	Regulator; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Aerotaxis and redox taxis sensor; flavoprotein; senses intracellular energy (redox) levels, and mediates energy taxis, as does Tsr	Energy taxis includes aerotaxis, redox taxis and glycerol taxis. aer is up-regulated by FlhCD and CRP. aer mutants are down for genes involved in anaerobic respiration and the Entner-Doudoroff pathway. The six operons up-regulated by Aer are dmsABC, fdnGHI, frdABCD, glpAB, nrfABCDE and edd. The patA(ygjG)-aer divergent operon promoter region binds ArcA and ArcA represses aer expression (Federowicz, 2014).	b3072
cutC	dinY?	putative copper homeostasis protein	Putative transport; Detoxification	Putative copper homeostasis protein	The copper phenotype of cutC mutants is due to disruption of the micL sRNA gene which affects Lpp levels; however cutC may still have a role in copper homeotasis (Gui, 2014). A ModE-regulated promoter was identified downstream of the cutC gene that could generate an anti-cutC RNA of unknown function, tentatively named as morB (Kurata, 2013).	b1874
glk	None	glucokinase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Glucokinase	2/44 Glk peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed (Maillet, 2007).	b2388
syd	ydr	SecY-interacting protein	Null	SecY-interacting protein; putative SecYEG quality control protein	Syd is a member of the Syd/SUKH-2 (PF07348) family of the SUKH superfamily of putative toxin immunity proteins (Zhang, 2011). Syd may prevent degradation of SecE-free SecY (Shimoike, 1995).	b2793
norV	flrd, ygaI, ygaJ, ygaK	anaerobic nitric oxide reductase flavorubredoxin	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Anaerobic nitric oxide reductase flavorubredoxin	Upregulated by GSNO in defined medium.	b2710
pqiA	pqi5	paraquat-inducible, SoxRS-regulated inner membrane protein	Phenotype; Not classified	Paraquat-inducible, SoxRS-regulated inner membrane protein; RpoS regulon; function unknown	The pqiABC operon P1 promoter is paraquat-inducible (superoxide generator-inducible) and SoxRS-regulated; P2 is RpoS-regulated (Koh, 1995; Kim, 2005; Ito, 2008). PqiA is the prototype protein for the PqiA (PF04403) integral membrane domain; PqiA is comprised of two tandem PqiA domains. The pqiAB and yebST genes are paralogous.	b0950
pqiB	pqi5	paraquat-inducible, SoxRS-regulated MCE domain protein	Phenotype; Not classified	Paraquat-inducible, SoxRS-regulated MCE domain protein; RpoS regulon; predicted N-terminal membrane anchor; C-terminal DASH_Duo1-related domain; function unknown	The pqiABC operon P1 promoter is paraquat-inducible (superoxide generator-inducible) and SoxRS-regulated; P2 is RpoS-regulated (Koh, 1995; Kim, 2005; Ito, 2008). PqiB has three tandem MCE domains (PF02470) followed by a C-terminal DASH complex subunit Duo1 PF08651-like domain. The pqiAB and yebST genes are paralogous.	b0951
yciO	None	putative RNA binding protein	Null	Predicted RNA binding protein; low abundance protein	TsaA paralog YciO does not complement a tsaC(yrdC) mutational defect in t(6)A37 synthesis (Gerdes, 2011). yciO, rimN(yrdC) and hypF are paralogs.	b1267
yciQ	yciP	enhancer of membrane protein expression; putative inner membrane protein	Null	DUF2207 family putative inner membrane protein; enhancer of cloned membrane protein expression	YciQ co-expression increases the overproduction of cloned membrane proteins (Skretas, 2010).	b1268
ygfF	yqfD	putative NAD(P)-dependent oxidoreductase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Predicted oxidoreductase, COG1028 family; function unknown	2/12 YgfF peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed (Maillet, 2007).	b2902
scpB	mmcD, ygfG	methylmalonyl-CoA decarboxylase, biotin-independent	Enzyme; Not classified	Methylmalonyl-CoA decarboxylase	Part of a four gene operon encoding enzymes converting succinate to propionate.	b2919
scpC	ygfH	propionyl-CoA:succinate CoA transferase	Enzyme; Not classified	Propionyl CoA:succinate CoA transferase	Part of a four gene operon encoding enzymes converting succinate to propionate.	b2920
ygfI	None	putative DNA-binding transcriptional regulator	Putative regulator; Not classified	LysR-family transcriptional regulator, function unknown	Null	b2921
yggP	None	putative Zn-binding dehydrogenase	Null	Predicted Zn-binding dehydrogenase, function unknown	YggP has an N-terminal ADH-GroES-like domain (Pfam PF08240) and a central Zn-binding dehydrogenase domain (Pfam PF00107).	b4465
yggR	None	putative PilT family AAA+ ATPase	Putative transport; Not classified	PilT family predicted AAA+ ATPase, function unknown	YggR belongs to the TypeII/IV secretion system AAA+ ATPase family of PilT/GspE-like proteins (Pfam PF00437). gspE, hofB and yggR are paralogs.	b2950
yggS	None	UPF0001 family protein, PLP-binding	Putative enzyme; Not classified	UPF0001 family protein, PLP-binding; mutant has perturbed isoleucine/valine metabolism	A yggS mutant accumulates exogenous L-valine in stationary phase, accumulates 2-ketobutyrate in log phase, and has reduced availability of coenzyme A; the phenotypes of a yggS mutant can be reversed by pantothenate addition and can be complemented by wildtype yggS but not its PLP-binding site mutant deriviative; YggS has been proposed to be a regulator of isoleucine and valine metabolism (Ito, 2013). A yggS glyA double mutant is a synthetic lethal (Nichols, 2011). YggS is homologous to the N-terminal domain of alanine racemase but does not have racemase activity towards any of the 20 L- or D-amino acids (Ito, 2013). YggS is not required to help YggT in the K+ uptake rescue of TK420 (lacking K+ uptake systems Trk, Kup and Kdp) (Ito, 2009). YhfX and YggS are single domain proteins related to the N-terminal domains of both synthetic (Alr) and catabolic (DsdX) alanine racemases, which contain the covalently PLP-modified lysine residue N6-(pyridoxal phosphate)lysine; since YhfX and YggS lack the C-terminal Alr/DadX domains containing the L-alanine-specific binding site and proton-accepting active site, it is unlikely that these enzymes have alanine racemase activity. YggS has a covalently PLP-modified Lys36 N6-(pyridoxal phosphate)lysine residue (Sulzenbacher, G., Gruez, A., Spinelli, S., Roig-Zamboni, V., Pagot, F., Bignon, C., Vincentelli, R., Cambillau, C., unpublished PDB structure 1W8G, 2006). V. alginolyticus FkuA, a YggS homolog, confers K+ uptake (with FkuB, a YggT homolog) on E. coli TK420 (lacking K+ uptake systems Trk, Kup and Kdp) (Nakamura, 1996). yggS is in the MprA regulon (Marbach, 2012). 9/112 YggS peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is not removed; 3/112 YggS peptide masses are consistent with some YggS molecules having the initial Met removed (Maillet, 2007).	b2951
yggT	None	putative inner membrane protein; compensates for loss in K+ uptake	Null	Predicted inner membrane protein; compensates for loss in K+ uptake	Although V. alginolyticus FkuAB stimulates K+ uptake, YggT appears to rescue TK420 (lacking K+ uptake systems Trk, Kup and Kdp) without increasing K+ uptake, through an unknown mechanism (Ito, 2009). Chromosomal yggT is probably not expressed since low level plasmid-based yggT expression was required for the rescue of TK420 (lacking K+ uptake systems Trk, Kup and Kdp) (Ito, 2009). YggS is not required to help YggT in the K+ uptake rescue of TK420 (lacking K+ uptake systems Trk, Kup and Kdp) (Ito, 2009). V. alginolyticus FkuB, a YggT homolog, confers K+ uptake (with FkuA, a YggS homolog) on E. coli TK420 (lacking K+ uptake systems Trk, Kup and Kdp) (Nakamura, 1996). YggT is the prototype for a family of proteins of unknown function (Pfam PF02325); YggT is comprised of two tandem YggT motifs.	b2952
yggU	None	UPF0235 family protein	Null	UPF0235 family protein, function unknown	Null	b2953
rdgB	yggV	dITP/XTP pyrophosphatase	Enzyme; Not classified	dITP/XTP pyrophosphatase, synthetic lethal with recA; mutant is hyper-recombinogenic	2'-deoxy-N-6-hydroxylaminopurine triphosphate (dHAPTP) is a preferred substrate (Burgis, 2006). Mutations in nfi suppress the synthetic lethality of an rdgB recA double mutant.	b2954
yggW	None	HemN family putative oxidoreductase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	HemN family predicted oxidoreductase, function unknown; Radical SAM superfamily	YggW has three predicted Fe-binding iron-sulfur centers and seven predicted SAM binding sites. A YggW ortholog is induced in a fur mutant in Shewanella oneidensi (Thompson, 2002).	b2955
yggX	None	oxidative damage protective factor for iron-sulfur proteins 	Null	Confers protection of iron-sulfur proteins against oxidative damage; paraquat resistance	SoxRS regulon. Cys7 is essential for YggX function in Salmonella; Salmonella YggX is involved in Fe(II) trafficking, but does not bind iron. otherPDB (S. typhimurium): 1XS8.	b2962
mltC	yggZ	membrane-bound lytic murein transglycosylase C	Putative enzyme; Murein sacculus, peptidoglycan	Membrane-bound lytic transglycosylase C, murein hydrolase; periplasmic OM-attached lipoprotein	MltC is an exolytic transglycosylase that can degrade both non-crosslinked and crosslinked murein chains (Lee, 2013). MltC has a C-terminal lysozyme-like domain. The first 16 aa of MltC are a type II signal peptide. SoxRS regulon. A mutant lacking five murein hydrolases (amiABCmltCD=MHD90) has a delayed lysis phenotype after beta-lactam treatment (Heidrich, 2002).	b2963
yqgA	None	DUF554 family putative inner membrane protein	Putative transport; Not classified	Predicted inner membrane protein, DUF554 family, function unknown	Null	b2966
yghD	ecfC, gspMbeta	putative membrane-anchored secretion pathway M-type protein	Putative transport; Not classified	General secretion protein M beta	An intact Gsp-beta (T2SS-beta) locus was functionally characterized in ETEC strain H10407 (Strozen, 2012). GspM proteins have a short cytoplasmic N-terminal domain, a transmembrane domain, and a C-terminal periplasmic domain. The yghFED(gspCLM-beta) operon appears to have suffered a deletion including the gspDEFGHIJK-beta genes (7403 bp) between the yghF'(gspCbeta) and the yghLM(gspLMbeta) genes. The entire operon from an enterotoxigenic strains of E. coli is present in Genbank AY056599.	b2968
yghE'	ecfB, gspLbeta	pseudogene, secretion pathway protein, L-type protein homology	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction, general secretion protein family; L-type; C-terminal fragment	An intact Gsp-beta (T2SS-beta) locus was functionally characterized in ETEC strain H10407 (Strozen, 2012). The K-12 yghFED(gspCLMbeta) operon appears to have suffered a deletion including the gspDEFGHIJK-beta genes (7403 bp) between the yghF'(gspCbeta) and the yghLM(gspLM-beta) genes. The stop codon of yghF' was removed, fusing 12 C-terminal residues out-of-frame but overlapping part of the fused yghE' gene. The N-terminal 74 residues of yghE' were removed by the deletion event. The entire operon from an enterotoxigenic strains of E. coli is present in Genbank AY056599.	b2969
yghF'	ecfA, gspCbeta	pseudogene, secretion pathway protein, C-type protein homology	Putative transport; Not classified	Pseudogene, general secretion protein; N-terminal fragment	An intact Gsp-beta (T2SS-beta) locus was functionally characterized in ETEC strain H10407 (Strozen, 2012). The K-12 yghFED(gspCLMbeta) operon appears to have suffered a deletion including the gspDEFGHIJK-beta genes (7403 bp) between the yghF'(gspCbeta) and the yghLM(gspLM-beta) genes. The stop codon of yghF' was removed, fusing 12 C-terminal residues out-of-frame but overlapping part of the fused yghE' gene. The N-terminal 74 residues of yghE' were removed by the deletion event. The entire operon from an enterotoxigenic strains of E. coli is present in Genbank AY056599. The first 276 residues of YghF' are identical to the entire GspC-beta (YghF) of two enterotoxigenic ETEC strains of E. coli. The Genbank version of K-12's yghF' [gi:1789341] does not include the first 35 codons of this partial gene. It appears only the stop codon of the ancestral yghF was deleted, fusing on an additional 12 C-terminal residues. The yghFED promoter is active and the yghF gene is possibly functional despite the extra C-terminal residues present in the K-12 version of the gene, which are: YRLFCPPYWKKS. A CTG start codon 7 codons upstream is predicted to be the start codon since it makes a much better signal peptide, but since CTG is used so rarely as a start codon, this needs to be verified. The first 23 aa of YghF' are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b2970
yghG	gspSbeta	secretin (GspDbeta) OM localization lipoprotein pilotin	Null	Pilotin, required for secretin (GspDbeta) OM localization; part of defective gsp-beta (T2SS-beta) operon; OM lipoprotein	YghG(GspSbeta) was characterized as an outer membrane lipoprotein that functions as a pilot protein (pilotin) required for proper assembly and localization of secretin (GspDbeta) in ETEC strain H10407; YghG is apparently not homologous to other pilotins, e.g. P. aeruginosa PilF and S. flexneri MxiM (Strozen, 2012). The E. coli K-12 gsp-beta (T2SS-beta) operon has a large internal deletion including the gspDbeta secretin gene. The first 24 aa of YghG are a type II signal peptide.	b2971
pppA	yghH	bifunctional prepilin leader peptidase/ methylase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Prepilin protein peptidase	The E. coli K-12 gsp-beta (T2SS-beta) operon has a large internal deletion. The K-12 PppA prepilin protein peptidase is able to process the K. oxytoca type IV pseudopilin PulG and the N. gonorrhoeae type IV pilin PilE and is translated at 37C and 42C but not 30C (Francetic, 1998). PppA is required for Gsp-beta function, as determined for the ETEC strain H10407 which has an intact gsp-beta (T2SS-beta) operon (Strozen, 2012). Assembly of the pseudopilus proteins (GspGK-beta) that presumably gate the secretin (GspDbeta) OM pore is proposed to require N-terminal processing by the PppA prepilin protein peptidase in intact Gsp (T2SS) systems; these pseudopilus protein genes are deleted in K-12 and thus its PppA prepilin protein peptidase may not have a native substrate anymore.	b2972
sslE	acfD(V.c.), yghJ	putative secreted and surface-associated lipoprotein mucinase	Null	Putative secreted and surface-associated lipoprotein mucinase	SslE has been characterized in the extraintestinal pathogenic E. coli strain IHE3034 as a likely extracellular lipoprotein mucinase (UniProt D5D0J3); a sslE deletion strain lacks extracellular mucinase activity and this defect can be complemented by plasmid-encoded SslE but is not complemented by a cloned active site mutated SslE (Nesta, 2014). Purified SslE(YghJ) from EPEC strain H10407 degrades MUC2 and MUC3 intestinal mucins in vitro, and an active site mutation abrogates activity (Luo, 2014). SslE(YghJ) is secreted by the type II secretion system T2SS-beta, is localized on the cell surface of pathogenic E. coli cells, and is required for biofilm formation, colonization and virulence (Moriel, 2010; Baldi, 2013; Nesta, 2014). An sslE mutation has no effect on adherence and biofilm formation in an atypical EPEC strain (Hernandes, 2013). The non-pathogenic E. coli W strain secretes SslE (Decanio, 2013). Since K-12 lacks an intact T2SS-beta it is unlikely that K-12 secretes SslE. Although sslE(yghJ) is adjacent to the gsp-beta (T2SS-beta) genes, it is not required for Gsp-beta function, as determined for the ETEC strain H10407 which has an intact gsp-beta (T2SS-beta) operon (Strozen, 2012). SslE(YghJ) is homologous to V. cholerae accessory colonization factor AcfD. SslE(YghJ) has a central DUF4092 domain. SslE(YghJ) has an M60 zinc metallopeptidase-like C-terminal domain (Pfam PF13402) associated with mucinase activity (Nakjang, 2012). The first 23 aa of SslE(YghJ) are predicted to be a type II signal peptide and the N-terminus of SslE from the prototype human EPEC strain E2348/69 is blocked from Edman degradation (Baldi, 2012).	b4466
glcA	yghK	glycolate transporter	Putative transport; Not classified	Glycolate permease; also recognizes lactate	IT (Ion Transporter) superfamily (Prakash, 2003). ST(3) structural class based on hydropathy profile (Lolkema, 2003).	b2975
glcE	gox, yghL	glycolate oxidase FAD binding subunit	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	Glycolate oxidase subunit	Null	b4468
glcD	gox, yghM	glycolate oxidase subunit, FAD-linked	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Glycolate oxidase subunit	Null	b2979
glcC	yghN	glycolate-inducible glc operon transcriptional repressor; autorepressor	Regulator; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Transcriptional reperssor for glc operon, glycolate-binding	GlcC is a GntR-type DNA-binding transcriptional regulator.	b2980
yghO'	None	pseudogene, IS-interrupted	Null	Pseudogene, N-terminus-truncated; IS-interrupted; N-acetyltransferase superfamily	IS5LO has inserted into the N-terminus of yghO at codon 8, deleting the first 8 codons of yghO as well as any genes that were between yghO and yghQ. For example, E. coli CFT073 has eight genes (c3712-9) in the yghO-yghQ interval. The IS5LO-interrupted yghO alelle appears to be K-12 specific, indicating it could be a laboratory-acquired mutation. The missing eight N-terminal amino acids of an intact 374 aa YghO are MIKIEKVI, as can be found on any of the many intact alelles of yghO in other genomes, e.g. yghO of E. coli CFT073 (c3711). However, YghO of CFT073 is annotated as a 402 aa protein; yghO(c3711) has an annotated start codon 28 codons upstream of the probable start site; other alternate starts upstream of the conserved site are annotated variously across E. coli genomes. The MI start, but not the upstream alternate start codons, is conserved in all three YghO orthologs, all of which are annotated using the conserved MI start: Serratia marcescens SMWW4_v1c32720, Shimwellia blattae EBL_c39850, and Erwinia billingiae EbC_37190. Curiously, of 45 non-K-12 E. coli genomes with YghO alleles, only one (strain LF82) annotates the conserved yghO start codon (LF82_3204). In K-12 there are three upstream in-frame ATG codons encoded in IS5LO that possibly could be used to express a hybrid 'YghO. 	b2981
yghQ	None	putative inner membrane polysaccharide flippase	Null	Predicted polysaccharide translocating flippase; inner membrane protein	YghQ belongs to a family (NCBI COG2244; Pfam PF13440) related to polysaccharide flippases (Wzx, RfbX) mediating the translocation of extracellular polysaccharides. YghQ is an inner membrane protein with six transmembrane helicies and the C-terminus in the periplasm (Daley, 2005). The IS5LO IS element has inserted immediately after the yghQ stop codon. 	b2983
yghR	None	putative ATP-binding protein	Null	Predicted ATP-binding protein, function unknown	Null	b2984
yghS	None	putative ATP-binding protein	Null	Predicted ATP-binding protein, function unknown	Probable false positive lipoprotein prediction, Cys not conserved.	b2985
yghT	None	putative ATP-binding protein	Null	Predicted ATP-binding protein, function unknown	Null	b2986
yghU	None	putative S-transferase	Null	GSH-dependent disulfide bond oxidoreductase	There is another possible start codon 16 codons upstream, but this upstream start codon is not conserved. Using MS analysis, 1/107 peptides matched the longer N-terminus, but despite this observation the current start is retained as the most likely start codon (Maillet, 2007).	b2989
hybO	yghV	hydrogenase 2, small subunit	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Hydrogenase-2 small subunit, periplasmic	Verified Tat substrate: HybO has a Tat-only (Class I) 37 aa signal peptide (Tullman-Ercek, 2007). Bound HybC is co-exported. HT_Cmplx26_Mem: HyaB+HybO.	b2997
yghW	None	DUF2623 family protein	Null	DUF2623 family protein, function unknown	Null	b2998
yghX'	yghY	pseudogene, dienlactone hydrolase family	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction, S9 peptidase family	A ModE-regulated promoter was identified downstream of the yghX gene that could generate an anti-yghX RNA of unknown function; a translation fusion indicated that a small protein encoded by a morA gene might be made from an anti-yghX mRNA, possibly a 63 aa MorA protein initiating at an unusual proline start codon; in vitro translation was not observed (Kurata, 2013). Although some apparent sequence conservation possibly due to yghX was observed in closely related bacteria, stop codons were present within the morA reading frame, indicating morA might not be a protein coding gene despite yielding some expression from a fusion construct; an E. coli ETEC H10407 strain contains a duplication elsewhere of the first 76 bases of the putative morA gene (K.E.R.). An apparent frameshift at codon 141 of yghX' was reconstructed and translated as an X.	b4658
gpr	mgrA, yghZ	L-glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate reductase	Null	L-glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate reductase, NADPH-dependent; glyoxal and glycolaldehyde reductase; glyoxal resistance protein	Gpr(YghZ) is a heme binding protein, but the heme is not required for Gpr activity (Desai, 2009). Gpr(YghZ) has moderate glyoxal and glycolaldehyde reductase activity and a gpr(yghZ) deletion mutant is glyoxal sensitive (Lee, 2013). Gpr(YghZ) is a weak methylglyoxal reductase and Gpr(YghZ) overexpression confers increased resistance to methylglyoxal. AKR14 family.	b3001
yqhA	None	UPF0114 family putative inner membrane protein	Null	UPF0114 family predicted inner membrane protein; function unknown	The yghA-yqhA divergent operon promoter region binds FNR (Federowicz, 2014).	b3002
yqhC	None	transcriptional activator of yqhD	Regulator; Not classified	Transcriptional activator of yqhD; aldehyde sensor	Mutations in yqhC conferring constitutive activation of yqhD were isolated as glyoxal-resistant mutants; YqhC was shown to bind and activate the yqhD promoter (Lee, 2010). An IS10 insertion in yqhC confers furfural resistance; YqhC is a transcriptional activator of yqhD and dkgA(yqhE) (Turner, 2010). AraC family.	b3010
yqhD	None	aldehyde reductase, NADPH-dependent	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Aldehyde reductase, NADPH-dependent; glyoxal and glycolaldehyde reductase; AdhZ1; protects against lipid oxidation; glyoxal resistance protein; furfural reductase; contains Zn; homodimer	HT_Cmplx40_Cyt: YbgI+YqhD. YqhD is induced under conditions that favor lipid oxidation; overexpression increases resistance to paraquat, hydrogen peroxide and the lipid peroxidation-derived aldehydes butanaldehyde, propanaldehyde, acrolein and malondialdehyde; yqhD mutants are senstive to paraquat and hydrogen peroxide (Perez, 2008). YqhD catalyzes the NADPH-dependent reduction of acetaldehyde, malondialdehyde, propanaldehyde, butanaldehyde and acrolein in vitro (Perez, 2008). YqhD was reported to have no aldehyde dehydrogenase activity and to have in vitro alcohol dehydrogenase activity with a preference for alcohols longer than C3, however these results were later contradicted (Sulzenbacher, 2004; Perez, 2009). Mutations in yqhC conferring constitutive activation of yqhD were isolated as glyoxal-resistant mutants; YqhC was shown to bind and activate the yqhD promoter (Lee, 2010).	b3011
dkgA	yqhE	2,5-diketo-D-gluconate reductase A	Null	2,5-diketo-D-gluconate reductase A; 2-methylacetoacetate reductase, NADPH-dependent; beta-keto ester reductase; glyoxal reductase	DkgA(YqhE) has moderate glyoxal reductase activity and weak glycolaldehyde reductase activity; deletion of dkgA(yqhE) does not increase sensitivity to glyoxal, glycolaldehyde or methylglyoxal (Lee, 2013).	b3012
yqhG	yqhF	DUF3828 family putative periplasmic protein	Null	Predicted DUF3828 family periplasmic protein; function unknown	The first 18 aa of YqhG are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b3013
yqhH	None	outer membrane lipoprotein, Lpp paralog	Null	Novel verified lipoprotein, Lpp paralog, function unknown	The first 19 aa of YqhH are a type II signal peptide.	b3014
ygiQ	ygiR	Radical SAM superfamily protein	Null	Radical SAM superfamily protein, function unknown	The YgiQ Radical SAM protein has a predicted B12 binding site in its N-terminal domain (K.E.R., unpublished observation). UPF0313 family.	b4469
ygiS	None	putative ABC transporter permease	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative ABC transporter permease	The first 20 aa of YgiS are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b3020
mqsA	ygiT	antitoxin for MqsR toxin; transcriptional repressor	Null	Antitoxin for MqsR toxin; transcriptional repressor	mqsA(ygiT) was identified as a multicopy suppressor of a carA deletion (Patrick, 2007). Toxin MsqR could not be cloned in an ara vector unless antitoxin MqsA(YgiT) is upregulated (Shah, 2006). MqsR destabilizes the MqsA repressor-DNA complex by tightly binding MqsA (Brown, 2012).	b3021
mqsR	ygiU	GCU-specific mRNA interferase toxin of the MqsR-MqsA toxin-antitoxin system; biofilm/motility regulator; anti-repressor	Null	GCU-specific mRNA interferase, toxin-antitoxin pair MqsRA; motility, quorum-sensing biofilm regulator; works through QseBC and AI-2; anti-repressor	mqsR is induced during biofilm formation. Toxin MqsR could not be cloned in an ara vector unless antitoxin MqsA(YgiT) is upregulated (Shah, 2006). MqsR destabilizes the MqsA repressor-DNA complex by tightly binding MqsA (Brown, 2012). Toxin endoribonuclease MqsR degrades ghoS antitoxin mRNA but not ghoT toxin mRNA, amplifying the GhoT toxin production as a stress response (Wang, 2013). MqsR induction increases GhoT production; GhoT is localized to poles and does not cause cell lysis during normal physiology but does impair membrane function, causing a reduction of cellular ATP and PMF energy sources, a lowered metabolism, and an increase in the number of persistent (dormant) cells formed in the presence of antibiotics (Cheng, 2013).	b3022
ygiV	None	transcriptional repressor for mcbR biofilm gene	Null	Represses mcbR, involved in biofilm regulation	Null	b3023
ygiW	None	hydrogen peroxide and cadmium resistance periplasmic protein; stress-induced OB-fold protein	Null	Hydrogen peroxide and cadmium resistance periplasmic protein; stress-induced OB fold domain protein; binds CsrB sRNA	A ygiW mutant strain is sensitive to hydrogen peroxide and cadmium (Lee, 2010). YgiW was identified as a CsrB sRNA binding protein (Windbichler, 2008). YgiW has a bacterial OB fold domain (BOF, PF04076) (Ginalski, 2004). ydeI and ygiW are paralogs.	b3024
qseB	preA(S.T.), ygiX	quorum sensing DNA-binding response regulator in two-component regulatory system with QseC	Null	Quorum sensing two-component response regulator; cognate to QseC sensor kinase; regulates flagella synthesis and motilty by activating transcription of flhDC	Null	b3025
qseC	preB(S.t.), ygiY	quorum sensing sensory histidine kinase in two-component regulatory system with QseB	Null	Quorum sensing two-component sensor kinase; cognate to QseB response regulator; regulates flagella synthesis and motilty by activating transcription of flhDC; responds to AI-3 and 	Characterized in an EHEC strain, QseC has been shown to respond and bind to AI-3 and AI-3-cross signaling human hormones epinephrine and norepinephrine (Clarke, 2006). A mutant qseC confers sensitivity to pyrazinoic acid.	b3026
ygiZ	None	inner membrane protein	Null	Inner membrane protein, function unknown	Null	b3027
yqiC	None	BMFP family putative fusogenic protein	Null	BMFP family predicted fusogenic protein, function unknown	Null	b3042
ygcE	None	putative kinase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Putative sugar kinase, function unknown	yqcE-ygcE may be a sugar catabolism operon.	b2776
queE	ygcF	7-carboxy-7-deazaguanine synthase; queosine biosynthesis	Enzyme; cofactor biosynthesis	7-carboxy-7-deazaguanine synthase; queuosine biosynthesis	An E. coli queE(ygcF) mutant lacks quenosine and epoxyqueuosine (Miles, 2011). The orthologous B. subtilis QueE has been shown to have 7-carboxy-7-deazaguanine (CDG) synthatse activity in vitro; QueE converts 6-carboxy-5,6,7,8-tetrahydropterin (CPH(4) to CDG (McCarty, 2009). The B. subtilis ortholog is involved in queuosine preQ0 synthesis (Reader, 2004). Overexpression causes filamentous biofilm formation (Tenorio, 2003). Radical SAM superfamily.	b2777
ygcG	None	TPM domain protein, putative phosphatase	Null	TPM domain protein, putative phosphatase	ygcG expression is reduced five-fold upon induction of the sxy gene on a plasmid (Sinha, 2009). The first 17 aa of YgcG may be a signal anchor; three TM regions are predicted for amino acids 175-250.	b2778
ygeF'	None	pseudogene	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction, part of T3SS PAI ETT2 remnant	This pseudogene is a remnant of the type three secretion system (T3SS) pathogenicity island ETT2. 18 kb of ETT2 has been deleted from K-12, leaving 10 kb of the presumably non-functional T3SS ETT2 remaining. An intact version is present in strain 042, and in strain O157:H7 as Z4171/ECs3707.	b2850
ygeG	None	SycD-like chaperone family TPR-repeat-containing protein	Null	Putative secretion chaperone, part of T3SS PAI ETT2 remnant	This gene is a remnant of the type three secretion system (T3SS) pathogenicity island ETT2. 18 kb of ETT2 has been deleted from K-12, leaving 10 kb of the presumably non-functional T3SS ETT2 remaining. YgeG is homologous to secretion-associated chaperones SicA (Salmonella), SycD (Yersinia) and IpgC (Shigella).	b2851
ygeH	None	putative transcriptional regulator	Putative factor; Not classified	HilA homolog; part of T3SS PAI ETT2 remnant; putative trancriptional regulator of ETT2	This gene is a remnant of the type three secretion system (T3SS) pathogenicity island ETT2. 18 kb of ETT2 has been deleted from K-12, leaving 10 kb of the presumably non-functional T3SS ETT2 remaining.	b2852
ygeI	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Function unknown, part of T3SS PAI ETT2 remnant	This gene is a remnant of the type three secretion system (T3SS) pathogenicity island ETT2. 18 kb of ETT2 has been deleted from K-12, leaving 10 kb of the presumably non-functional T3SS ETT2 remaining.	b2853
pbl'	ygeJ	pseudogene, peptidoglycan-binding enzyme family	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction, pilT homolog; part of T3SS PAI ETT2 remnant; putative murein hydrolase; putative periplasmic protein	This pseudogene is a remnant of the type three secretion system (T3SS) pathogenicity island ETT2. 18 kb of ETT2 has been deleted from K-12, leaving 10 kb of the presumably non-functional T3SS ETT2 remaining. Pbl is homologous to virulence-related export proteins, e.g. IagB (S.t.), IpgF (S. flexneri), PilT (plasmid R64). This family may be involved in making holes in the peptidoglycan layer for macromolecular transport purposes. The first 24 aa of Pbl are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. Codon usage indicates pbl is an alien (horizontal) gene. Hypothetical reconstruction of an apparent frameshift mutation after codon 148 extends Pbl to 167 aa. An intact version (Z4175) is present in strain 042 and and in O157:H7 EDL933 (SP Q8X6H3).	b2854
ygeK'	ygeL	pseudogene, response regulator family, part of T3SS PAI ETT2 remnant	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction, part of T3SS PAI ETT2 remnant; response regulator family	This pseudogene is a remnant of the type three secretion system (T3SS) pathogenicity island ETT2. 18 kb of ETT2 has been deleted from K-12, leaving 10 kb of the presumably non-functional T3SS ETT2 remaining. Stop codon 52 is translated as an X. YgeK is homologous to the Spi-2 regulator SsrB. Codon usage indicates ygeK is an alien (horizontal) pseudogene. The complete YgeK is present in E. coli O157:H7, SP P58664, with a Gln in place of the in-frame stop codon. LuxR family.	b2856
ygeN'	ygeM	pseudogene, orgB family, part of T3SS PAI ETT2 remnant	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction, orgB homolog; part of T3SS PAI ETT2 remnant	An apparent frameshift at codon 87 has been reconstructed with an X. This pseudogene is a remnant of the type three secretion system (T3SS) pathogenicity island ETT2. 18 kb of ETT2 has been deleted from K-12, leaving 10 kb of the presumably non-functional T3SS ETT2 remaining. YgeN is homologous to OrgB (S.t.) and MxiN (S. flexneri). Codon usage indicates ygeN is an alien (horizontal) gene. An intact version of YgeN is encoded in the E. coli O42 genome.	b2858
ygeO'	None	pseudogene, orgA family, part of T3SS PAI ETT2 remnant	Null	Pseudogene, orgA homolog, part of T3SS PAI ETT2 remnant	ygeO was thought to be required to generate the pentapeptide (in MC4100) but subsequent work demonstrated that overproduction of Zwf could suppresss the YgeO' mutant defect, indicating a secondary role for YgeO' (Kolodkin-Gal, 2007; 2008). ygeO' is an apparent pseudogene in MG1655 and in MC4100 as well, so the ygeO' pseudogene is not responsible for the failure of MG1655 to produce or respond to normal levels of ECD. The yegO' pseudogene is a remnant of the type three secretion system (T3SS) pathogenicity island ETT2. 18 kb of ETT2 has been deleted from K-12, leaving 10 kb of the presumably non-functional T3SS ETT2 remaining. YgeO' is homologous to OrgA (S.t.) and MxiK (S. flexneri). IS2H is at the point of YgeO N-terminus truncation. The 5' end of ygeO has apparently been deleted from the MG1655 genome. Codon usage indicates ygeO is an alien (horizontal) gene. The intact YgeO (193 aa) is encoded in E. coli O157:H7 RIMD (ECs3715).	b2859
ygeQ'	ygeP	pseudogene, glycosyl hydrolase family 15, part of T3SS PAI ETT2 remnant 	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction, glycosyl hydrolase family 15; part of T3SS PAI ETT2 remnant	This pseudogene is a remnant of the type three secretion system (T3SS) pathogenicity island ETT2. 18 kb of ETT2 has been deleted from K-12, leaving 10 kb of the presumably non-functional T3SS ETT2 remaining. Full length YgeQ (536 aa) is encoded in the E. coli O42 genome. IS2H is inserted at the point of YgeQ C-terminal 157 residue truncation. The 3' end of ygeQ has apparently been deleted from the MG1655 genome. A stop codon at position 265 is translated as an X, although in all intact versions and in distant homologs, this codon encodes a conserved Gly residue. A 24 aa signal peptide is predicted for YgeQ. Codon usage indicates ygeQ is an alien (horizontal) gene.	b2863
ygeR	None	LysM domain-containing M23 family putative peptidase; septation lipoprotein 	Putative structure; Not classified	Novel lipoprotein involved in septation	NlpD, YgeR, MepM(YebA) and EnvC have C-terminal LytM murein-binding domains; mutating all four LytM domain genes produces a strain with a severe filamentous phenotype, similar to an amiABC triple mutant, of over 20 tmes the normal cell length and more than 70 times the normal amount of septa/cell, from 0.5 to 36 septa/cell; also similar to the amiABC mutant, the nlpD-envC-mepM(yebA)-ygeR mutant has altered morphology and delayed onset of lysis after beta-lactam antibiotic treatment (Uehara, 2009). ygeR is a backbone gene flanking the insertion of the type three secretion system pathogenicity island ETT2. 18 kb of ETT2 has been deleted from K-12, leaving a 10 kb remnant. The first 25 aa of YgeR are a type II signal peptide. Metalloprotease homolog; M23 family.	b2865
xdhA	ygeS	xanthine dehydrogenase, molybdenum binding subunit	Null	Xanthine dehydrogenase molybdenum-binding subunit; involved in limited purine catabolism; mutation confers adenine sensitivity	Null	b2866
xdhB	ygeT	xanthine dehydrogenase, FAD-binding subunit	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Xanthine dehydrogenase FAD-binding subunit; involved in limited purine catabolism	Null	b2867
xdhC	ygeU	xanthine dehydrogenase, Fe-S binding subunit	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Iron-sulfur binding xanthine dehydrogenase subunit; involved in limited purine catabolism	Null	b2868
ygeV	None	putative sigma-54-interacting transcriptional activator	Putative regulator; Not classified	Putative RpoN-dependent transcriptional activator, function unknown; induced by AI-2 pheromone	Null	b2869
ygeW	None	putative carbamoyltransferase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Predicted carbamoyltransferase, substrate unknown	Although related to arginine, ornithine and putrescine carbamoyltransferases, YgeW is in a distinct clade, indicative of a novel activity (Naumoff, 2004). YgeW has been suggested to be an oxamate carbamoyltransferases (transcarbamylase) involved in purine catabolism (Xi, 2000). Oxamate, allantoin and other substrates were tested but purified YgeW had no activity on any of them (Li, 2011).	b2870
ygeX	None	2,3-diaminopropionate ammonia lyase, PLP-dependent	Enzyme; Not classified	2,3-diaminopropionate ammonia lyase, PLP-dependent	Expression of ygeX is low but YgeX can function to protect cells from DL-DAP toxicity in minimal medium when overexpressed (Kalyani, 2012). The N-terminus of the overexpressed protein has been sequenced, but the natural RBS was not used so it is not a Verified protein; the initial Met is cleaved (Khan, 2003). The N-terminus of the native S. typhimurium YgeX has been Verified (Nagasawa, 1988).	b2871
ygeY	None	putative peptidase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Peptidase homolog, function unknown; M20D family	YgeY binds zinc (Sevcenco, 2011). YgeY was postulated to be an N-succinyl-L-diaminopimelic acid desuccinylase involved in purine catabolism (Xi, 2000).	b2872
hyuA	ygeZ	D-stereospecific phenylhydantoinase	Null	D-stereospecific phenylhydantoinase; physiological function unknown	YgeZ is tetrameric. The upstream TTG may be utilized in vivo, although the ATG indicated here is a more likely in vivo start. The overexpressed, N-terminally sequenced protein was synthesized with an artificial RBS for the TTG start. Native protein N-terminus has not been determined.	b2873
yqeA	None	putative amino acid kinase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Carbonate kinase homolog; function unknown	Null	b2874
yqeB	None	XdhC-CoxI family protein with NAD(P)-binding Rossman fold	Putative enzyme; Not classified	XdhC-CoxI family protein with NAD(P)-binding Rossman fold, function unknown	Null	b2875
yqeC	None	putative selenium-dependent hydroxylase accessory protein	Null	Putative selenium-dependent hydroxylase accessory protein	Phylogenetic profiling correlates yqeC with selD and YqeC has been predicted to be a selenium-dependent hydroxylase accessory protein however there is no experimental evidence to support this prediction (Haft, 2008). YqeC is a predicted P-loop NTPase (IPR027417) possibly with a Mur ligase central domain (IPR013221).	b2876
mocA	ygfJ	CTP:molybdopterin cytidylyltransferase	Null	CTP:molybdopterin cytidylyltransferase; converts Mo-molybdopterin (Mo-MPT) cofactor (Moco) to the molybdopterin cytosine dinucleotide (MCD) cofactor (a Moco form)	mocA and mobA are paralogs.	b2877
ygfK	None	putative Fe-S subunit oxidoreductase subunit	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Putative selenate reductase FeS subunit; mutants impaired in selenium reduction; NADPH:O2 oxidoreductase activity	YgfK contains iron and is an iron–sulfur flavoprotein with in vitro NADPH:O2 oxidoreductase activity (Sevcenco, 2011). A Tn insertion in ygfK is unable to reduce selenate to selenite; YgfKM-XdhD(YgfN) was proposed to be a selenate reductase structural complex but no activity could be detected (Bébien, 2002).	b2878
ssnA	ygfL	putative chlorohydrolase/aminohydrolase	Putative structure; Not classified	Required for early stationary phase viability decline; aminohydrolase related; negatively regulated by RpoS	A ssnA mutant has increased survival in early stationary phase and overexpression of SsnA slows growth and causes cells to have an enlarged filamentous cell morphology (Yamada, 1999). TIGRFam TIGR03314 notes that ssnA is restricted to genomes that also have a set of predicted selenium-depndent co-factors suggesting that SsnA may be involved in selenium metabolism. SsnA has been purified and shown not to have isoguanine deaminase activity (Hitchcock, 2011).	b2879
ygfM	None	putative oxidoreductase	Null	Putative FAD-binding subunit of an XdhD-YgfM hypoxanthine oxidase	XdhD(YgfN) contains iron and may be a dehydrogenase molybdopterin and Fe-S cluster catalytic subunit with YgfM being a FAD-containing subunit; YgfM and XdhD(YgfN) form a complex (Sevcenco, 2011). XdhD is a xanthine dehydrogenase homolog but probably has no xanthine dehydrogenase activity. A Tn insertion in ygfK is unable to reduce selenate to selenite; YgfKM-XdhD(YgfN) was proposed to be a selenate reductase structural complex but no activity could be detected (Bébien, 2002).	b2880
xdhD	ygfN	putative hypoxanthine oxidase, molybdopterin-binding/Fe-S binding	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Probable hypoxanthine oxidase, Fe-S subunit; mutation confers adenine sensitivity	XdhD(YgfN) contains iron and may be a dehydrogenase molybdopterin and Fe-S cluster catalytic subunit with YgfM being a FAD-containing subunit; YgfM and XdhD(YgfN) form a complex (Sevcenco, 2011). XdhD is a xanthine dehydrogenase homolog but probably has no xanthine dehydrogenase activity. A Tn insertion in ygfK is unable to reduce selenate to selenite; YgfKM-XdhD(YgfN) was proposed to be a selenate reductase structural complex but no activity could be detected (Bébien, 2002).	b2881
xanQ	ygfO	xanthine permease	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Nucleosides, purines, pyrimidines	Xanthine permease	Null	b2882
guaD	ygfP	guanine deaminase	Null	Guanine deaminase	guaD mutants are deficient in ammeline deaminase activity indicating ammeline is a GuaD substrate (Seffernick, 2009).	b2883
ghxQ	ygfQ, ygfR	guanine/hypoxanthine permease, high affinity; guanine/hypoxanthine:H+ symporter	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Nucleosides, purines, pyrimidines	Guanine/hypoxanthine permease, high affinity	Null	b4464
ygfS	None	putative 4Fe-4S ferredoxin-type oxidoreductase subunit	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Predicted electron transport protein, function unknown	Null	b2886
ygfT	None	putative oxidoreductase, Fe-S subunit/nucleotide-binding subunit	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Putative oxidoreductase, Fe-S subunit, function unknown; aegA paralog	Null	b2887
uacT	ygfU	uric acid permease	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Nucleosides, purines, pyrimidines	Uric acid permease	In addition to its robust uric acid permease function, UacT has weak xanthine permease activity (Papkostas, 2012). Related to B. subtilis pbuX.	b2888
idi	ygfV	isopentenyl diphosphate isomerase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Isopentenyl diphosphate isomerase, isoprenoid biosynthesis; interconverts isopentenyl diphosphate (IPP) and dimethylallyl diphosphate (DMAPP)	The idi gene is nonessential.	b2889
cptA	pigV(Serratia), ygfX	toxin of CptAB toxin-antitoxin pair	Null	Toxin of CptAB toxin-antitoxin pair	E. coli CptA(YgfX) can complement a Serratia sdhE ygfX double mutant, restoring synthesis of the characteristic red tripyrrole pigment prodigiosin (Pig), and may have an unknown regulatory role in E. coli (McNeil, 2012). CptA has an N-terminal membrane domain and C-terminal cytoplasmic domain and CptA blocks growth when overproduced in vivo; the C-terminal CptA domain binds to and inhibits the polymerization of MreB and FtsZ in vitro; the mechanism for the apparent antitoxin activity of SdhE(CptB) during co-overproduction is unknown but SdhE(CptB) does not bind directly to CptA (Masuda, 2012). Although CptA is descibed as a toxin, it may actually be a toxic product, i.e. it is toxic when overproduced but serves an important non-toxin role when it is made at a tolerable level; it may be important to control the levels of toxic products in vivo and the apparent antitoxin activity of SdhE(CptB) may be a mechanism to limit CptB expression to avoid unwanted toxic effects, i.e. SdhE(CptB) co-expression has an anti-toxic effect, but SdhE(CptB) is not a true antitoxin (K.E.R.).	b2896
sdhE	cptB, ygfY	flavinator of succinate dehydrogenase; antitoxin of CptAB toxin-antitoxin pair	Factor; Energy metabolism, carbon: TCA cycle	Flavinator of succinate dehydrogenase; antitoxin of CptAB toxin-antitoxin pair	E. coli SdhE(YgfY, CbtB) can complement the growth defect associated with a Serratia ygfX sdhE double mutant; Serratia SdhE was shown to bind FAD and to facilitate the flavinylation of SdhA in vitro; an E. coli sdhE(cbtB) mutant has an inactive succinate dehydrogenase; the sdhE gene is significantly clustered with SDH subunit genes in bacterial genome sequences (McNeil, 2012). SdhE may also facilitate FrdA flavinylation (McNeil, 2013). CptA has an N-terminal membrane domain and C-terminal cytoplasmic domain and CptA blocks growth when overproduced in vivo; the C-terminal CptA domain binds to and inhibits the polymerization of MreB and FtsZ in vitro; the mechanism for the apparent antitoxin activity of SdhE(CptB) during co-overproduction is unknown but SdhE(CptB) does not bind directly to CptA (Masuda, 2012). Although CptA is descibed as a toxin, it may actually be a toxic product, i.e. it is toxic when overproduced but serves an important non-toxin role when it is made at a tolerable level; it may be important to control the levels of toxic products in vivo and the apparent antitoxin activity of SdhE(CptB) may be a mechanism to limit CptB expression to avoid unwanted toxic effects, i.e. SdhE(CptB) co-expression has an anti-toxic effect, but SdhE(CptB) is not a true antitoxin (K.E.R.).	b2897
ygdR	None	DUF903 family verified lipoprotein	Null	DUF903 family verified lipoprotein, function unknown	ygdR and ygdI are paralogs (Pfam PF06004). The first 19 aa of YgdR constitute a type II signal peptide.	b2833
yqfA	None	hemolysin III family HylIII inner membrane protein	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Function unknown; hemolysin III family HylIII; promoter binds FabR	Null	b2899
yqfB	None	UPF0267 family protein	Null	Function unknown, UPF0267 family	Null	b2900
bglA	bglD, yqfC	6-phospho-beta-glucosidase A	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Phospho-beta-glucosidase A; growth on arbutin or salicin when activated	bglA, bglB and ascB are paralogs.	b2901
ygdI	None	DUF903 family verified lipoprotein	Null	DUF903 family verified lipoprotein, function unknown	ygdI and ygdR are paralogs (Pfam PF06004). The first 19 aa of YgdI constitute a type II signal peptide.	b2809
csdA	ygdJ	cysteine sulfinate desulfinase	Null	Cysteine desulfurase, stimulated by CsdE	csdAE are a multicopy suppressor of iscS.	b2810
csdE	ygdK	CsdA-binding activator; Fe-S protein	Null	Binds and stimulates CsdA activity	CdsE is homologous to SufE. csdAE clones multicopy suppress iscS mutations.	b2811
tcdA	csdL, ygdL	tRNA threonylcarbamoyladenosine dehydratase; sulfur acceptor for CsdA	Putative enzyme; Not classified	tRNA threonylcarbamoyladenosine dehydratase; sulfur acceptor for CsdA, binds CsdE	TcdA(CsdL) is an ATP-dependent dehydratase required to convert t(6)A37 to cyclic t(6)A37 in several tRNA species; the cyclized form of the modified base ct(6)A37 is labile during extraction, explaining why it was descibed as t(6)A37 in earlier studies; ct(6)A37 was determined to contain a cyclized active ester with an oxazolone ring (Miyauchi, 2013). TcdA(CsdL) binds to CsdE, linking TcdA(CsdL) to CsdA; TcdA(CsdL) accepts sulfur from the CsdA donor directly in vitro, but CsdE might act as a sulfur relay protein in vivo (Trotter, 2009). TcdA(CsdL) is similar to the N-terminal domains of MoeB/ThiS protein adenylation/thiocarboxylation enzymes which are E1-like, ubiquitin-activating-like proteins, but TcdA(CsdL) lacks the probable zinc binding site found in MoeB/ThiS family.	b2812
mltA	mlt, ygdM	membrane-bound lytic murein transglycosylase A	Enzyme; Murein sacculus, peptidoglycan	Membrane-bound lytic transglycosylase A, murein hydrolase; periplasmic OM-attached lipoprotein	MltA is an exolytic transglycosylase that can degrade both non-crosslinked and crosslinked murein chains (Lee, 2013). MltA cleaves the glycosidic bonds between the N-acetylmuramic acid and N-acetylglucosamine residues in murein. Unlike Slt and MltB, MltA can use peptide-free glycan as substrate. The first 20 aa of MltA are a type II signal peptide. MltA forms a complex with MrcB and MipA. 	b2813
amiC	ygdN	N-acetylmuramoyl-L-alanine amidase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	N-acetylmuramyl-L-alanine amidase, periplasmic; recruited to the septal ring by FtsN during cell division; overexpression causes lysis; activated by NlpD	NlpD activates AmiC-mediated in vitro murein cleavage; nlpD and amiC mutants have the same phenotype, resulting from an AmiC defect (Uehara, 2010). AmiC is localized to the septal ring via its N-terminal septal targeting domain in constricting cells (Bernhardt, 2003). Divisome, non-essential. In amiABC triple mutants, thickened dark bands termed septal peptidoglycan (SP) rings appear at division sites, representing a cell division structure that accumulates when septal synthesis and hydrolysis by the AmiABC amidases are uncoupled (Priyadarshini, 2007). A mutant lacking five murein hydrolases (amiABCmltCD=MHD90) has a delayed lysis phenotype after beta-lactam treatment (Heidrich, 2002). AmiC is a verified Tat substrate (Bernhardt, 2003). AmiC has a predicted Tat-only (Class I) 31 aa signal peptide (Tullman-Ercek, 2007). Ize (2003) incorrectly report a predicted 33 aa signal peptide in the text, but correctly depict a predicted 31 aa signal peptide in Fig. 4A.	b2817
rppH	nudH, ygdP	RNA pyrophosphohydrolase	Putative factor; Not classified	RNA pyrophosphohydrolase, destabilizes primary transcripts	Nudix hydrolase. RppH removes 5' triphosphate from primary transcripts, enhancing RNase E activity (Deana, 2008). Required for invasion of cultured mammalian cells by both E. coli K1 and S. typhimurium. NudH also hydrolyzes Ap5A and Ap4A. RppH(NudH) is a ribosome-associated protein (Jiang, 2007).	b2830
ygdQ	None	UPF0053 family inner membrane protein	Putative transport; Not classified	Inner membrane protein, UPF0053 family, function unknown	ygdQ and eptB are negatively regulated by the mgrR sRNA (Moon, 2009). UPF0053 TerC family; TerC is involved in tellurite resistance.	b2832
tas	ygdS	putative NADP(H)-dependent aldo-keto reductase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Suppresses tyrosine requirement of tyrA14 O6 strain; putative aldo/keto reductase, NADP(H)-dependent	The natural substrate and physiological role for Tas is unknown. NADP(H) is found bound to the crystals, but no enzymatic activity for Tas has been demonstrated.	b2834
kduI	yqeE	hexuronate isomerase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	4-deoxy-L-threo-5-hexosulose-uronate ketol-isomerase; DKI isomerase; hexuronate isomerase	KduI and KduD activities were determined in Erwinia chrysanthemi, where they are required for pectin catabolism (Condemine, 1991). KDG is derived from pectin, a common plant heteropolysaccharide, although E. coli K-12 does not secrete pectinases or uptake pectin oligosaccharides and has only the core KDG regulon as compared to plant pathogens like Erwinia chrysanthemi, whose extracellular pectate lyases and intacellular oligogalacturonate lyase breaks pectin down mainly into 5-keto-4-deoxyuronate (DKI) monomers and to a lesser extent polygalacturonase-generated galacturonate; in E. coli K-12 galacturonate uptake and degradation is mediated by the ExuT permease and the UxaABC catabolic enzymes producing KDG, respectively, and DKI is imported by the KdgR-regulated KDG importer KdgT and catabolized to KDG via DKII by the KdgR-regulated KduID enyzymes; KDG is then converted to pyruvate and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate by KdsK and Eda(KdsA) (Rodionov, 2004; Hugouvieux-Cotte-Pattat, 1996). KduI and KduD are inducible by galacturonate and glucuronate and are required for optimal utilization of galacturonate and glucuronate at high osmolarity, presumably substituting for salt-repressed UxaC; cloned KduI alone was able to isomerize hexuronates in vivo, but the specific set of hexuronate substrates is unknown (Rothe, 2013). KduI is a prototype for a family of hexuronate ketol-isomerases in the cupin-like superfamily (PF04962) (Crowther, 2005). 4-deoxy-L-threo-5-hexosulose-uronate is also known as 5-dehydro-4-deoxy-D-glucuronate or 5-keto-4-deoxyuronate (DKI). The product of this reaction, 3-deoxy-D-glycero-2,5-hexodiulosonate (DKII), is also known as 3-deoxy-D-glycero-hexo-2,5-diulosonate, (4S)-4,6-dihydroxy-2,5-dioxohexanoate, or 2,5-diketo-3-deoxygluconate.	b2843
yqeF	None	short chain acyltransferase	Enzyme; Not classified	Short chain acyltransferase	YqeF has been shown to have short chain acyltransferase activity in astrain engineered to reverse the beta-oxidation cycle for synthesis of fuels and chemicals (Dellomonaco, 2011). yqeF is in the PhoB regulon (Bulyk, 2004).	b2844
yqeG	None	putative transporter	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative amino acid:H+ symport permease, function unknown	HAAAP family. yqeG is a common core gene adjacent to the insertion site of the type III secretion system pathogenicity island ETT2. 18 kb of ETT2 has been deleted from K-12, leaving a 10 kb remnant.	b2845
yqeH	None	putative LuxR family transcriptional regulator	Null	Predicted LuxR family transcriptional regulator; part of T3SS PAI ETT2 remnant	This gene is a remnant of the type three secretion system (T3SS) pathogenicity island ETT2. 18 kb of ETT2 has been deleted from K-12, leaving 10 kb of the presumably non-functional T3SS ETT2 remaining. YqeH is homologous to RmbA (S.t.) from the Spi-3 PAI. YqeH contains a C-terminal LuxR family HTH predicted DNA-binding domain.	b2846
yqeI	None	putative transcriptional regulator	Putative transport; Not classified	Part of T3SS PAI ETT2 remnant, ToxR homolog	This gene is a remnant of the type three secretion system (T3SS) pathogenicity island ETT2. 18 kb of ETT2 has been deleted from K-12, leaving 10 kb of the presumably non-functional T3SS ETT2 remaining. YqeJ is homologous to MarT (S.t.) from the Spi-3 PAI and to the cholera toxin transcriptional activator ToxR (V.c.).	b2847
yqeJ	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Part of T3SS PAI ETT2 remnant, function unknown	This gene is a remnant of the type three secretion system (T3SS) pathogenicity island ETT2. 18 kb of ETT2 has been deleted from K-12, leaving 10 kb of the presumably non-functional T3SS ETT2 remaining. The first 27 aa of YqeJ are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. YqeJ is homologous to FidL (S.t.) from the Spi-3 PAI.	b2848
pphB	prpB, ygbH	serine/threonine-specific protein phosphatase 2	Enzyme; Not classified	Ser/Thr protein phosphatase 2; signals periplasmic protein misfolding; heat shock regulon	Null	b2734
ygbI	None	DeoR family putative transcriptional regulator	Putative regulator; Not classified	Predicted transcriptional regulator, DeoR family, function unknown	Null	b2735
ygbJ	None	putative dehydrogenase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Function unknown	Null	b2736
ygbK	None	FliA-regulated DUF1537 family protein	Null	DUF1537 family protein, motility regulon; function unknown; mutants are not defective in motility or chemotaxis	ygbK is regulated by FlhDC and FliA but does not appear to have a role in motility or chemotaxis (Park, 2001).	b2737
ygbL	None	putative class II aldolase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Predicted class 2 aldolase, function unknown	Null	b2738
ygbM	None	putative hydroxypyruvate isomerase	Null	Predicted hydroxypyruvate isomerase	YgbM is 40% identical to its paralog Hyi.	b2739
ygbN	None	putative transporter	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative GntP family transporter, function unknown	IT (Ion Transporter) superfamily (Prakash, 2003). ST(3) structural class based on hydropathy profile (Lolkema, 2003).	b2740
truD	ygbO	tRNA(Glu) pseudouridine(13) synthase	Enzyme; tRNA modification	tRNA(Glu) pseudouridine(13) synthase	Null	b2745
ispD	ygbP	4-diphosphocytidyl-2C-methyl-D-erythritol synthase	Null	2-C-methyl-D-erythritol 4-phosphate cytidylyltransferase; alternative nonmevalonate (DXP) pathway for terpenoid biosynthesis; essential gene	IspD is also called 4-diphosphocytidyl-2-C-methylerythritol synthase.	b2747
ftsB	ygbQ	cell division protein	Null	Membrane protein required for cell division; septum localization dependent on Ftsl and FtsQ	ftsB is an essential gene. FtsB forms a complex with FtsL prior to mid-cell localization; this complex formation requires FtsQ, but not FtsK. Divisome.	b2748
ygbT	cas1	multifunctional endonuclease Cas1, CRISPR adaptation protein; DNA repair enzyme	Null	Multifunctional endonuclease Cas1, CRISPR adaptation protein; DNA repair enzyme	ygbT(cas1) and ygbF(cas2) are required for efficient adaptation, the process of inserting foreign plasmid or phage DNA into a CRISPR array to prevent future attacks (Yosef, 2012). YgbT(Cas1) is a multifuncitonal endonuclease that can cleave linear ssRNA, ssDNA, short dsDNA (34-mer), and various branched DNAs such replication forks and Holliday junctions in vitro; ygbT mutants have increased sensitivity to DNA damage and have impaired chromosomal segregation; genetic interactions suggest Cas1 involvement in RecBC and RuvB mediated DNA repair (Babu, 2011). YgbT(Cas1) of P. aeruginosa is a metal-dependent DNA-specific endonuclease that makes dsDNA fragments around 80 bp long (Wiedenheft, 2009). OtherPDB (P. aeruginoa):3GOD. DUF48 member. YgbT(Cas1) is the only protein associated with all CRISPR loci.	b2755
casE	cas6e, cse3, ygcH	CRISPR RNA precursor cleavage enzyme; CRISP RNA (crRNA) containing Cascade antiviral complex protein	Null	CRISPR RNA precursor cleavage enzyme; CRISPR RNA (crRNA) containing Cascade antiviral complex	CasE(YgcH) can cleave or facilitate autocleavage of CRISPR RNA (crRNA) precursors to ~67 nt fragments (Brouns, 2008). The Cascade antiviral complex is comprised of CasABCDE and short CRISPR RNAs (crRNAs) and requires the predicted helicase YgcB(Cas3) for activity (Brouns, 2008).	b2756
casD	cas5, ygcI	CRISP RNA (crRNA) containing Cascade antiviral complex protein	Null	CRISPR RNA (crRNA) containing Cascade antiviral complex	The Cascade antiviral complex is comprised of CasABCDE and short CRISPR RNAs (crRNAs) and requires the predicted helicase YgcB(Cas3) for activity (Brouns, 2008).	b2757
casC	cas4, cas7, cse4, ygcJ	CRISP RNA (crRNA) containing Cascade antiviral complex protein	Null	CRISPR RNA (crRNA) containing Cascade antiviral complex	The Cascade antiviral complex is comprised of CasABCDE and short CRISPR RNAs (crRNAs) and requires the predicted helicase YgcB(Cas3) for activity (Brouns, 2008).	b2758
casB	cse2, ygcK	CRISP RNA (crRNA) containing Cascade antiviral complex protein	Null	CRISPR RNA (crRNA) containing Cascade antiviral complex	The Cascade antiviral complex is comprised of CasABCDE and short CRISPR RNAs (crRNAs) and requires the predicted helicase YgcB(Cas3) for activity (Brouns, 2008).	b2759
casA	cse1, ygcL	CRISP RNA (crRNA) containing Cascade antiviral complex protein	Null	CRISPR RNA (crRNA) containing Cascade antiviral complex	The Cascade antiviral complex is comprised of CasABCDE and short CRISPR RNAs (crRNAs) and requires the predicted helicase YgcB(Cas3) for activity (Brouns, 2008). BaeSR regulon. CasA is homologous to human TRRAP protein, phosphatidylinositol kinases and DNA-dependent protein kinases.	b2760
queD	sscR, ygcM	6-pyruvoyl tetrahydrobiopterin synthase (PTPS)	Putative enzyme; Not classified	6-carboxy-5,6,7,8-tetrahydropterin synthase; queuosine biosynthesis	QueD was mistakenly identified as a 6-pyruvoyl tetrahydrobiopterin (PPH4) synthase (PTPS); the identity of the product was not confirmed (Woo, 2002). QueD synthase converts 7,8-dihydroneopterin triphosphate (H2NTP) to 6-carboxy-5,6,7,8-tetrahydropterin (CPH4) and can also make CPH4 from PPH4 or sepiapterin (McCarty, 2009). The B. subtilis queD ortholog is involved in queuosine preQ0 synthesis (Reader, 2004).	b2765
ygcN	None	putative oxidoreductase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Predicted oxidoreductase with FAD/NAD(P)-binding domain	The ygcNOP operon promoter region binds FNR (Federowicz, 2014). fixC, ydiS and ygcN are paralogs.	b2766
ygcO	None	putative 4Fe-4S cluster-containing protein	Null	Ferredoxin-like protein	The ygcNOP operon promoter region binds FNR (Federowicz, 2014).	b2767
ygcP	None	putative antiterminator regulatory protein	Putative regulator; Not classified	Predicted antiterminator regulatory protein	YgcP belongs to the G3P_antiterm antiterminator Pfam PF04309 family. The ygcNOP operon promoter region binds FNR (Federowicz, 2014).	b2768
ygcQ	None	putative flavoprotein	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Putative electron transfer flavoprotein, function unknown; predicted alpha subunit	YgcQR probably form a complex.	b2769
ygcR	None	putative flavoprotein	Putative transport; Not classified	Cell death gene, function unknown; predicted electron transfer flavoprotein, beta subunit	YgcR is required for MazF-mediated cell death after DNA damage (Amitai, 2009). YgcQR probably form a complex.	b2770
ygcS	None	putative MFS sugar transporter; membrane protein	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative MFS transporter, function unknown; membrane protein	YgcS is a member of the Sugar Porter (SP) family within the Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS) of transporters.	b2771
ygcU	ygcT, ygcV	putative FAD-linked oxidoreductase	Null	Putative FAD-containing oxidoreductase, function unknown	Null	b4463
ygcW	None	putative SDR family oxidoreductase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Predicted SDR family oxidoreductase; function unknown	YcgW belongs to the short-chain dehydrogenases/reductases (SDR) family (Pfam PF00106) of known and predicted NAD- or NADP-dependent oxidoreductases.	b2774
znuC	yebM	zinc ABC transporter ATPase	Putative transport; Not classified	Zinc ABC transporter ATPase	Mutations in znuC have increased motility in the presence of high [NaCl], which normally suppresses motility (Girgis, 2007). 	b1858
ycaL	None	putative peptidase-related chaperone	Putative factor; Not classified	Verified lipoprotein, predicted metalloprotease	M48 protease family. Gene disruption does not cause growth defect, unpublished data, Y. Akiyama, cited in Sakoh, 2005. First 19 aa are a type II signal peptide.	b0909
uup	ycbH, ycbI	replication regulatory ABC-F family DNA-binding ATPase	Factor; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	DNA-binding ATPase involved in replication; cytosolic; ABC-F family protein	A uup mutant displays an increased frequency of precise excision of transposons and defective growth of bacteriophage Mu. The Uup ATPase activity is essential for function. A C-terminal domain of Uup displays predicted structural homology with the Little Finger domain of Y family DNA polymerases and is involved in DNA binding. Uup is a procaryotic ABC-F family member defined by two ABC transporter-related predicted ATP-binding domains (Pfam:PF0005) joined by a linker domain (Pfam: PF12848); other ABC-F family members include eucaryotic translation-related factors and the E. coli K-12 proteins EttA, YbiT, and YheS (Boël, 2014; Chen, 2014).	b0949
tynA	maoA	tyramine oxidase, copper-requiring	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Amines	Copper amine oxidase; tyramine oxidase; Cu(II) and topaquinone cofactors; homodimer	Topaquinone (TPQ) is 2,4,5-trihydroxyphenylalanine quinone, and is derived from a tyrosyl residue in the active site, in a copper-dependent oxidation reaction.	b1386
dinB	dinP	DNA polymerase IV	Null	DNA polymerase IV, capable of translesion synthesis; overexpression enhances mutagenesis; mediates targeted mutagenesis by 4-NQO; intrinsic AP lyase activity	DinB and YafP reduce 4-nitroquinoline-1-oxide-induced mutagenicity (Gutierrez, 2011). Part of dinB-yafNOP operon. LexA regulon. The phenotype of some dinB alleles to reduce spontaneous mutations may be due to polarity effects.	b0231
dinJ	sosA	antitoxin of YafQ-DinJ toxin-antitoxin system	Phenotype; Not classified	Antitoxin of TA pair YafQ/DinJ	Coexpression of DinJ with YafQ blocks the growth inhibition of YafQ (Motiejunaite, 2007; Szekeres, 2007). DinJ and YafQ form a complex (Motiejunaite, 2007). LexA regulon. Weak LexA binding site has given ambiguous results.	b0226
lafU'	mbhA	pseudogene, lateral flagellar motor protein fragment	Null	Pseudogene, lateral flagellar motor protein fragment	Flag-2 motility system gene lafU remnant, C-terminal fragment. MotB, OmpA homolog. Intact E. coli O42 allele: SP Q5DXZ5. The E. coli K-12 lafU pseudogene is missing the first 56 codons.	b0230
lfhA'	fhiA	pseudogene, flagellar system protein, promoterless fragment	Null	Pseudogene, lateral flagellar assembly protein fragment	Flag-2 motility system gene lfhA remnant, C-terminal fragment. FHI, FlhA family. Intact E. coli O42 allele: SP Q5DY37. The E. coli K-12 lfhA pseudogene is missing the first 127 codons. A dubious translation of the adjacent REP19 cluster has been misinterpreted as a pseudogene.	b0229
fadE	fadF(S.t.), yafH	acyl coenzyme A dehydrogenase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Medium-long-chain fatty acyl-CoA dehydrogenase	FadR regulon. Starvation inducible.	b0221
gmhA	isn(H.i.), lpcA, tfrA, yafI	D-sedoheptulose 7-phosphate isomerase	Enzyme; Surface polysaccharides & antigens	Phosphoheptose isomerase; D-sedoheptulose 7-phosphate isomerase; GDP-heptose biosynthesis; T-phage resistance	6/125 GmhA(LpcA) peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is not removed (Maillet, 2007).	b0222
yafJ	None	type 2 glutamine amidotransferase family protein	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Putative type 2 glutamine amidotransferase	Null	b0223
yafK	None	L,D-transpeptidase-related protein	Null	L,D-transpeptidase-related protein, function unknown	YafK has been reported to be required for biofilm production in enteroaggregative E. coli (Sheikh, 2001). The first 19 aa of YafK are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. YafK has a degenerate LDT active site missing a conserved Cys residue.	b0224
yafL	None	putative lipoprotein and C40 family peptidase	Putative membrane; Not classified	Predicted peptidase, C40 clan; probable lipoprotein, Cys conserved; putative PG hydrolase	The first 17 aa of YafL are predicted to be a type II signal peptide. Spr, NlpC, YafL and MepH(YdhO) are paralogous members of the NlpC/P60 peptidase superfamily (Pfam entry: PF00877).	b0227
rayT	tnpAREP, yafM	RAYT REP element-mobilizing transposase; TnpA(REP)	Null	RAYT REP element-mobilizing transposase; TnpA(REP)	RAYT specifically binds, cleaves and recombines REP DNA in vitro (Ton-Hoang, 2011). The complex between RAYT and REPs is called a REPtron. RAYT is an IS200-related transposase whose orthologs are always flanked by a pair of REP clusters (BIMEs); transient DNA linkages to a tyrosine residue are a hallmark of IS200-related transposases; REP-containing genomes without rayT genes have a ten-fold lower number of REPs in their genomes; RAYT does not seem to mobilize itself in host genomes, but it is hypothesized that RAYT can mobilize REPs in trans, indicating that REPs may be a new class of nonautonomous transposable elements (TEs) thus providing a mechanism for REP multiplication and dispersal around bacterial genomes (Nunvar, 2010). REP doublets, renamed as REPINs, may be the mobilizable unit of a REP nonautonomous TE and REP singlets may be degraded doublets (Bertels, 2011).	b0228
yafN	None	antitoxin of the YafO-YafN toxin-antitoxin system	Null	Antitoxin for YafO toxin	YafN is an essential gene; although there is a deletion of yafN in the Keio collection, that deletion strain also has a frameshift mutation in yafO, allowing the deletion of yafN (Singletary, 2009). YafN is an StbD homolog and a distant homolog of DnaT. LexA regulon. dinB-yafNOP operon. The phenotype of some dinB alleles to reduce spontaneous mutations may be due to polarity effects. LexA regulon.	b0232
yafO	None	mRNA interferase toxin of the YafO-YafN toxin-antitoxin system	Null	mRNA interferase, toxin-antitoxin pair YafNO	LexA regulon. dinB-yafNOP operon. The phenotype of some dinB alleles to reduce spontaneous mutations may be due to polarity effects on yafO. Overexpression causes filamentous biofilm formation and increased CV staining. Overexpression is reported to inhibit growth (Brown, 2003).	b0233
yafP	None	GNAT family putative N-acetyltransferase	Null	GNAT family putative N-acetyltransferase; antimutator activity towards 4-nitroquinoline-1-oxide; lexA regulon	DinB and YafP reduce 4-nitroquinoline-1-oxide-induced mutagenicity (Gutierrez, 2011). LexA regulon. dinB-yafNOP operon. The phenotype of some dinB alleles to reduce spontaneous mutations may be due to polarity effects.	b0234
yafQ	None	mRNA interferase toxin of toxin-antitoxin pair YafQ/DinJ	Null	Translation inhibitor toxin of TA pair YafQ/DinJ; mRNA interferase	YafQ is homologous to the RelE toxin, which inhibits translation as a sequence-specific mRNA endoribonuclease. Coexpression of DinJ with YafQ blocks the growth inhibitory effect of YafQ (Motiejunaite, 2007; Szekeres, 2007). YafQ overexpression does not inhibit rich media growth completely (but does block growth on M9 glycerol plates) or cause a loss in CFU, as do the other toxins (Motiejunaite, 2007). DinJ and YafQ form a complex (Motiejunaite, 2007).	b0225
ais	pagH(S.t.), pmrG(S.t.)	putative LPS core heptose(II)-phosphate phosphatase	Phenotype; Not classified	Predicted LPS core heptose(II)-phosphate phosphatase; aluminum-inducible protein; Salmonella ortholog is regulated by PmrAB(BasRS)	A signal anchor is predicted.	b2252
mlc	dgsA	glucosamine anaerobic growth regulon transcriptional repressor; autorepressor 	Regulator; Not classified	Global transcriptional repressor; regulates pts operon expression at P0; required for anaerobic growth on glucosamine, binds nagC promoters; regulates manX and malT; makes large colonies; autorepressor	Null	b1594
xapB	None	xanthosine transporter	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	Xanthosine transporter	NupG, XapB and YegT are paralogs. Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS).	b2406
yfeN	None	putative outer membrane protein	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Predicted outer membrane protein	The first 22 aa are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b2408
dsdC	None	dsd operon activator; autorepressor	Regulator; Degradation of small molecules: Amino acids	Transcriptional activator for dsdA	LysR family. DsdC has been incorrectly noted to be D-serine permease. Overexpression of DsdC causes filamentous biofilm formation. The dsdC-X order is reversed in different sequence entries.	b2364
ybeM'	ybeH	pseudogene, C-N hydrolase superfamily homology	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Pseudogene reconstruction, putative CN hydrolase	UPF0012: family of proteins that cleave carbon-nitrogen (CN) bonds, including nitrilases and amidases. For the protein sequence reconstruction presented, an X is placed at codon 66, the site of a one bp deletion, and the protein sequence is continued in the new frame.	b4581
yqfE'	None	pseudogene, LysR family	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction, C-terminal fragment, LysR family	An inframe stop codon at position 19 is translated as an X. An intact full length version of YqfE (298 aa) is ECEG_02279 in E. coli B354.	b2915
yqgB	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Soluble expressed protein, function unknown	Null	b2939
yqgC	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Function unknown	Null	b2940
gudD	ygcX	D-glucarate dehydratase 1	Null	D-glucarate dehydratase; L-idarate dehydratase; D-glucarate, L-idarate epimerase	Null	b2787
gudX	ygcY	glucarate dehydratase-related protein, substrate unknown	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Glucarate dehydratase-related protein, function unknown	Although adjacent to and highly similar in sequence to gudD, gudX does not seem to have glucarate dehydratase activity in vivo.	b2788
gudP	ygcZ	putative D-glucarate transporter	Null	Probable D-glucarate transporter, membrane protein	Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS).	b2789
yqcA	None	short-chain flavodoxin, FMN-binding	Null	Short-chain flavodoxin, FMN-binding	YqcA has been characterized as a short-chain flavodoxin binding to FMN (Ye, 2013).	b2790
truC	yqcB	tRNA(Ile1,Asp) pseudouridine(65) synthase	Enzyme; tRNA modification	tRNA(Ile1,Asp) pseudouridine(65) synthase	Null	b2791
yqcC	None	DUF446 family protein	Null	DUF446 family protein, function unknown	Null	b2792
queF	yqcD	7-cyano-7-deazaguanine reductase (NADPH-dependent)	Enzyme; Queuosine biosynthesis	7-cyano-7-deazaguanine reductase (NADPH-dependent); converts preQ0 to preQ1, queuosine biosynthesis	Asn, Asp, Tyr, and His tRNA GUN anticodons are modified by queuosine at the G. The product of the QueF reaction is 7-aminomethyl-7-deazaguanine (preQ1). Activity demonstrated in vitro. tgt mutants lack queuosine and are have reduced survival in stationary phase. (Noguchi, 1982). 7/125 QueF(YqcD) peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed (Maillet, 2007).	b2794
yqcE	yqcF	putative MFS transporter, inner membrane protein	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative MFS transporter, function unknown; inner membrane protein	YqcE is a member of the Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS) of transporters. yqcE-ygcE may be a sugar catabolism operon.	b2775
ftnB	yecI	ferritin B, putative ferrous iron reservoir	Putative carrier; Transport of small molecules: Cations	Ferritin B, probable ferrous iron reservoir; ferritin-like protein; required for oxidatively damaged aconitase iron-sulfur cluster repair and virulence in Salmonella; apparently missing an active ferroxidase center	FtnB has been characterized primarily in Salmonella (Velayudhan, 2007).	b1902
yaiI	None	UPF0178 family protein	Null	UPF0178 family protein, function unknown	YaiI has been reported to be down-regulated by beryllium (Taylor-McCabe, 2006).	b0387
rseB	None	anti-sigma E factor, binds RseA	Regulator; Global regulatory functions	Binds the periplasmic domain of anti-RpoE sigma factor RseA; enhances RpoE-RseA cytoplasmic complex formation	The first 23 aa of RseB are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b2571
rseC	None	SoxR iron-sulfur cluster reduction factor component	Regulator; Global regulatory functions	SoxR iron-sulfur cluster reduction factor component; with RsxABCDEG; probable ThiC reduction factor	Although rseC is in the rpoE-rseABC operon and has been reported to interact with and positively affect RpoE activity in vitro, an rseC deletion has no effect on RpoE activity in vivo (Missiakas, 1997; De Las Peñas, 1997). RseC has an RpoE-independent role in thiamine synthesis in Salmonella typhimurium (Beck, 1997). RseC is an inner membrane protein with two transmembrane helices and a C-terminus in the cytoplasm (Daley, 2005). RseC gives a probable false positive lipoprotein prediction since the lipobox is not conserved (Gonnet, 2004).	b2570
feaB	padA, ydbG	phenylacetaldehyde dehydrogenase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Phenylacetaldehyde dehydrogenase	Null	b1385
ydbH	None	putative membrane-anchored protein, function unknown	Null	Putative membrane-anchored protein	YdbH has been extensively mislabeled as a dicarboxylate transport family protein due to misannotations in three database profiles, namely Pfam PF11739, CDD cl14674, and InterPro IPR021730. YdbH has no similarities to any Dct transporters and is not predicted to be an integral membrane protein, although it does have a predicted N-terminal membrane anchor. The mislabeling of E. coli YdbH predicted function has arisen because the ygene naming systems for E. coli and B. subtilus, widely propagated to other Gram (-) and Gram (+) genomes, respectively, were developed independently and have many ygenes of the same name but share no homologous or functional relationships; the original ygene name for B. subtilus dctA was ydbH.	b1381
hslJ	ydbI	heat-inducible lipoprotein involved in novobiocin resistance	Factor; Adaptations, atypical conditions	Heat-inducible lipoprotein involved in novobiocin resistance	CysB regulon. Overexpression causes abnormal biofilm architecture. An hslJ multicopy plasmid blocks growth on minimal medium plus cysteine. The first 16 aa of HslJ are a type II signal peptide.	b1379
ydbJ	None	DUF333 family putative lipoprotein	Null	DUF333 family probable lipoprotein	The first 16 aa of YdbJ are predicted to be a type II signal peptide. The predicted lipidated Cys residue is conserved among YdbJ orthologs.	b4529
pfo	nifJ(K.p.), soi-9, ydbK	pyruvate-flavodoxin oxidoreductase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Pyruvate-flavodoxin oxidoreductase	Pfo(YdbK) has pyruvate-flavodoxin oxidoreductase activity in vivo and in vitro; the in vitro activity is oxygen-labile; pfo(ydbK) is superoxide- and methyl violet(MV)-inducible; pfo(ydbK) mutants are sensitive to MV, synergistically with fpr mutants, indicating a role in protection from oxidative stress; in vitro binding and mutational studies identify a SoxS binding site centered near -100 upstream from the pfo(ydbK) start codon (Nakayama, 2013). The operonic pfo(ydbK) and ompN genes are activated by SoxS; pfo(ydbK) mutants are paraquat sensitive in minimal medium (Fàbrega, 2012). pfo(ydbK) deletion reduces and Pfo(YdbK) overexpression enhances hydrogen production in an engineered strain (Akhtar, 2009). Pfo(YdbK) is probably the CoA-acetylating pyruvate:flavodoxin (ferredoxin) oxidoreductase previously purified and characterized (Blaschkowski, 1982). 2/82 Pfo(YdbK) peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is not removed (Maillet, 2007). Pfo(YdbK) is 48% identical (569/1183) to NifJ of K. pneumoniae and has two predicted iron-sulfur clusters: 680-709 and 736-765. Pfo(YdbK) has a C-terminal domain and an N-terminal domain predicted to be involved in binding the TPP (thiamine pyrophosphate) cofactor.	b1378
elaA	yfbC	GNAT family putative N-acetyltransferase	Null	GNAT family putative N-acetyltransferase	ElaA is 31% identical and 53% similar to SACOL1063 of S. aureus which has a preference for amino acid substrates (Kuhn, 2013). The elaABCD genes are named, without a phenotypic explanation, in Genbank U58768.	b2267
elaB	yfbD	putative membrane-anchored DUF883 family ribosome-binding protein	Null	Ribosome-binding protein, function unknown; probably membrane-anchored; DUF883 family	Overexpressed ElaB binds ribosomes and elaB is expressed mainly in stationary phase (Yoshida, 2012). DUF883 family. YgaM, ElaB and YqjD are paralogs predicted to have C-terminal inner membrane anchors (Luirink, 2011). The elaABCD genes are named, without a phenotypic explanation, in Genbank U58768. 	b2266
ldhA	hslF, hslI, htpH	fermentative D-lactate dehydrogenase, NAD-dependent	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Fermentation	D-lactate dehydrogenase, NAD-dependent	Null	b1380
puuE	goaG	4-aminobutyrate aminotransferase, PLP-dependent	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	4-aminobutyrate aminotransferase; putrescine utilization pathway	PuuE is important for use of putrescine as a nitrogen and carbon source, is induced by putrescine, and is repressed by succinate and low aeration conditions (Kurihara, 2010). PuuE and GabT are redundant enzymes in putrescine catabolism (Schneider, 2012).	b1302
intQ'	None	pseudogene, Qin prophage; phage integrase family	Phage or Prophage Related	Pseudogene, integrase fragment, Qin prophage	Null	b1579
folM	ydgB	dihydromonapterin reductase, NADPH-dependent; dihydrofolate reductase isozyme	Enzyme; Not classified	Dihydromonapterin reductase, tetrahydromonapterin synthesis; NADPH-dependent; dihydrofolate reductase isozyme	FolX and FolM are involved in the synthesis of tetrahydromonapterin, a major pterin that can exceed folate as an end-product of pterin biosynthesis (Pribat, 2009).	b1606
rstA	urpT	response regulator of RstAB two-component system	Regulator; Not classified	Response regulator of RstAB two-component system, low Mg-responsive via PhoQP; multicopy suppressor of yjeE, yeaZ or ygjD deletion lethality	Mg(2+) stimulon-PhoPQ regulon, EvgAS-PhoPQ cascade enhanced-expression subset. The ydgC-rstAB divergent promoter region binds ArcA and ArcA activates rstAB expression (Federowicz, 2014).	b1608
ydgC	None	GlpM family inner membrane protein	Null	GlpM family inner membrane protein	The ydgC-rstA divergent promoter region binds ArcA and ArcA represses ydgC expression (Federowicz, 2014).	b1607
ratB	pasI, yfjF	UPF0125 family protein	Null	Second gene in ratAB toxin operon, function unknown	RatAB function has been characterized in EPEC strain CFT073 as a true toxin-antitoxin module, with RatA contributing to oxidative and nitrosative stress resistance at low levels and causing growth inhibition and facilitating persister cell formation in the presence of antibiotics at high levels of expression, reversible by RatB; the resistance and persister functions are separable with an N-terminal toxic domain required for persister formation and a C-terminal stress resistance domain; MG1655 was tested and K-12 MG1655 ratAB mutants are not defective in antibiotic persister formation; ratAB has been renamed as pasTI (for Persistence And Stress-resistance Toxin and Immunity proteins) in CFT073 to reflect the new functions and to avoid conflict with the unrelated ratA genes of B. subtilis and Salmonella (Norton, 2012). RatB was predicted to be the antitoxin for the RatA toxin, but no antitoxin activity was observed (Zhang, 2011). RatA prevents translation initiation by blocking 50S and 30S subunit association; RatA action is blocked by paromomycin, an IF3 inhibitor (Zhang, 2011). UPF0125 family.	b2618
ratA	pasT, yfjG	toxic UPF0083 family protein inhibitor of 70S ribosome formation	Null	Toxic protein, inhibits 70S ribosome formation	RatAB function has been characterized in EPEC strain CFT073 as a true toxin-antitoxin module, with RatA contributing to oxidative and nitrosative stress resistance at low levels and causing growth inhibition and facilitating persister cell formation in the presence of antibiotics at high levels of expression, reversible by RatB; the resistance and persister functions are separable with an N-terminal toxic domain required for persister formation and a C-terminal stress resistance domain; MG1655 was tested and K-12 MG1655 ratAB mutants are not defective in antibiotic persister formation; ratAB has been renamed as pasTI (for Persistence And Stress-resistance Toxin and Immunity proteins) in CFT073 to reflect the new functions and to avoid conflict with the unrelated ratA genes of B. subtilis and Salmonella (Norton, 2012). RatA prevents translation initiation by blocking 50S and 30S subunit association; RatA action is blocked by paromomycin, an IF3 inhibitor (Zhang, 2011). Overexpression of RatA(YfjG) inhibits growth (Brown, 2003). UPF0083 family.	b2619
yfjH	None	CP4-57 prophage; uncharacterized protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Function unknown, CP4-57 putative defective prophage	Null	b2623
yfjI	None	CP4-57 prophage; uncharacterized protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Function unknown, CP4-57 putative defective prophage	Null	b2625
yfjJ	None	CP4-57 prophage; uncharacterized protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Function unknown, CP4-57 putative defective prophage	yfjJ of prophage CP4-57 is homologous to yajK of prphage CP4-6.	b2626
yfjK	None	radiation resistance protein; DEAD/H helicase-like protein; CP4-57 putative defective prophage	Phage or Prophage Related	Radiation resistance protein; DEAD/H helicase-like protein; CP4-57 putative defective prophage	A mutation causing A151D arose during selection for increased resistance to ionizing radiation and reconstruction experiments indicate that this single amino acid change conferred a tenfold increase in radiation resistance to E. coli; a yfjK deletion also increased resistance, but less so than the point mutation (Byrne, 2014). YfjK has both a DEAD/H helicase domain (Pfam PF00270) and a helicase C-terminal domain (Pfam PF00271). yfjK is in an operon with the predicted polymorphic toxin gene yfjL.	b2627
yfjL	None	CP4-57 putative defective prophage, DUF4297/DUF1837 polymorphic toxin family protein	Phage or Prophage Related	DUF4297/DUF1837 protein, predicted polymorphic toxin; function unknown; CP4-57 putative defective prophage	YfjL has an N-terminal DUF4297 (Pfam PF14130) domain and a C-terminal DUF1837 (Pfam PF08878) domain. YfjL is predicted to be a polymorphic toxin capable of restricting the growth of neighboring cells but it is listed as an putative inactive toxin because it is not clear how it would be secreted (Zhang, 2012). yfjLK constitute an operon.	b2628
yfjM	None	CP4-57 prophage; uncharacterized protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Function unknown, CP4-57 putative defective prophage	6.5 tandem copies of PDR-A, a small direct repeat of octamer GCACTATG, in a tandem array 52 bp long in prophage CP4-57 are 51 bp downstream of yfjM.	b2629
rnlA	std, yfjN	CP4-57 prophage; RNase LS	Phage or Prophage Related	RNase LS, endoribonuclease, toxin, affects mRNA stability; antitoxin is rnlB; CP4-57 putative defective prophage; target of phage T4 Dmd	RnlA is responsible for the rapid degradation of T4 late gene mRNAs in mutant T4 lacking the alternative RnlA anti-toxin Dmd (Otsuka, 2003; Otsuka, 2012). IscR is a transcriptional repressor for rnlA (Otsuka, 2010). RnlB is the antitoxin for the RnlA RNase LS (Koga, 2010).	b2630
rnlB	yfjO	CP4-57 prophage; uncharacterized protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Antitoxin for RnlA, CP4-57 putative defective prophage	RnlB is the antitoxin for the RnlA RNase LS (Koga, 2010).	b2631
yfjP	None	CP4-57 prophage; 50S ribosome-binding GTPase family protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Required for swarming phenotype, function unknown; putative GTP-binding protein, in CP4-57 putative defective prophage	Paralogous to yeeP and ykfA.	b2632
yfjQ	None	CP4-57 prophage; uncharacterized protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Function unknown, CP4-57 putative defective prophage	Null	b2633
yfjR	None	CP4-57 prophage; putative DNA-binding transcriptional regulator	Phage or Prophage Related	Function unknown, CP4-57 putative defective prophage; predicted transcriptional regulator	The YjfR family contains a predicted HTH domain.	b2634
yfjS	None	CP4-57 prophage; uncharacterized protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Inner membrane lipoprotein, function unknown, CP4-57; putative defective prophage	yfjS and yafY are homologs. The first 20 aa of YfjS are a type II signal peptide (Matsuyama, unpublished, cited in Miyadai, 2004). Although overproduction of YafY induces degP expression, YjfS does not; chimeric protein experiments demonstrate that the N- and C- termini of YafY have the degP stimulatory determinants (Miyadai, 2004). 	b2636
yfjT	None	CP4-57 prophage; putative periplasmic protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Predicted periplasmic protein, function unknown, CP4-57; putative defective prophage	Overexpression of YfjT causes abnormal biofilm architecture. The first 23 aa of YfjT are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b2637
yfjU'	None	CP4-57 prophage; conserved protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Pseudogene, CP4-57 putative defective prophage	Null	b2638
yfjV'	ypjL, ypjM	pseudogene, CP4-57 prophage	Phage or Prophage Related	Pseudogene reconstruction, arsB-like C-terminal fragment; CP4-57 putative defective prophage	An apparent frameshift at codon 39 was hypothetically reconstructed. Stop codon 116 is reconstructed as an X.	b2641
yfjW	None	CP4-57 prophage; putative inner membrane protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Predicted inner membrane protein, function unknown, CP4-57 putative prophage remnant	Null	b2642
yfjX	None	CP4-57 prophage; putative antirestriction protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Function unknown, CP4-57 putative prophage remnant	Null	b2643
yfjY	None	CP4-57 prophage; putative DNA repair protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Function unknown, CP4-57 putative prophage remnant	Null	b2644
yfjZ	None	CP4-57 prophage; antitoxin of the YpjF-YfjZ toxin-antitoxin system	Phage or Prophage Related	Antitoxin component of putative toxin-antitoxin YpjF-YfjZ; CP4-57 putative defective prophage	YfjZ mutant slightly NO sensitive. 	b2645
ypjA	None	adhesin-like autotransporter	Putative transport; Not classified	OM autotransporter homolog; overexpression increases adhesion	Mutants have reduced OM vesiculation (McBroom, 2006). First 29 aa are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b2647
yfhL	None	putative 4Fe-4S cluster-containing protein	Null	Function unknown	Null	b2562
cof	None	thiamine pyrimidine pyrophosphate hydrolase; HMP-PP phosphatase	Null	HMP-PP phosphatase; catalyzes hydrolysis of 4-amino-2-methyl-5-hydroxymethylpyrimidine pyrophosphate (HMP-PP); MeO-HMP-PP and CF3-HMP-PP also serve as substrates for Cof; HAD18	Cloned cof complements fur deletion mutant for growth on succinate: this gene name and function have only been reported as an annotation in EMBL entry Z54355, Patzer, S.I. and Hantke, K., 1995. HAD superfamily. Additional substrates include: pyridoxal phosphate (PLP), FMN, 2-deoxyglucose-6-P; in vitro activities demonstrated by Kuznetsova et al. (2005, 2006).	b0446
ybaE	None	putative ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein	Null	Putative ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein	Null	b0445
ybaO	grp?	putative DNA-binding transcriptional regulator	Putative regulator; Not classified	Lrp family predicted transcriptional regulator	Rob regulon.	b0447
ldcC	ldc, LDC2, ldcH	lysine decarboxylase 2, constitutive	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Pyruvate dehydrogenase	Lysine decarboxylase, constitutive	E. coli K-12 has two lysine decarboxylases. CadA(LdcI) is inducible and LdcC is constitutively expressed.	b0186
tilS	mesJ, yaeN	tRNA(Ile)-lysidine synthetase	Enzyme; tRNA modification	tRNA(Ile) lysidine (L34) synthase, ATP-dependent; solely responsible for tRNA(Ile) lysidine 34 (L34) formation	TilS(YaeN) is mistakenly labeled as a cell cycle gene in many databases; the confusion arose from the misinterpretation of Genbank Z50870; the real "minE suppressor" is the small rof gene next to tilS, labeled as orf4 in Z50870. PDB: 1NI5. Gu M., Burling T., Lima C.D., Structure of the MesJ PP-ATPase from Escherichia coli, unpublished.	b0188
rof	mesJ, yaeO	modulator of Rho-dependent transcription termination	Null	anti-Rho (termination factor); pleiotropic multicopy suppressor of Ts mutations; ribosome-associated; growth-rate regulated	This is the real "mesJ" minE suppressor, not yaeN.	b0189
yaeP	None	UPF0253 family protein	Null	UPF0253 family protein, function unknown	Null	b4406
yaeQ	None	PDDEXK superfamily protein	Putative enzyme; Not classified	PDDEXK superfamily protein, function unknown	Although Salmonella yaeQ was reported to be a multi-copy suppressor of the E. coli mutant rfaH anti-termination defect responsible for reduced hlyCABD expression, E. coli YaeQ is not an anti-terminator protein (Wong, 1998; Vicari, 2004). YaeQ is the prototype of a family of proteins of unknown function (Pfam PF07152) in the PDDEXK superfamily (Pfam CL0236) of nuclease and other nucleic acid binding enzymes.	b0190
yaeR	None	putative lyase	Null	Function unknown	Null	b0187
ftsK	dinH	DNA translocase at septal ring sorting daughter chromsomes	Phenotype; Cell division	DNA translocase at septal ring sorting daughter chromsomes	FtsK is required for resolution of chromosome dimers at dif by XerCD. FtsK helps keep the nucleoids properly localized, recognizing opposing replichores by using FtsK orienting polar sequences (KOPS). The N-terminal domain is membrane-anchored, localizes to the division septum and is required for cell division. The C-terminal domain has the non-essential translocase activity, which becomes essential for replicating the asymmetric replichores produced by chromosome inversion (Lesterlin, 2008). LexA regulon. Homologous to B. subtilis SpoIIIE protein. The ftsK gene is essential. The filamentous growth of mutants is suppressed by dacA deletions. ftsK44(ts) can be suppressed by an ftsA R286W mutation or by an ftsQAZ plasmid. Divisome.	b0890
modE	chlD, modR	transcriptional repressor for the molybdenum transport operon modABC	Regulator; Transport of small molecules: Anions	Repressor of the modABC operon for molybdenum transport; secondary activator of hyc and nar operons; dimeric	ModE mutants are unable to reduce selenate.	b0761
ycjG	ycjH	L-Ala-D/L-Glu epimerase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	L-Ala-D/L-Glu epimerase; also epimerizes some other Ala-X dipeptides	YcjG has a role in the recycling of the murein peptide (Schmidt, 2001; Park, 2008).	b1325
ybhD	None	putative DNA-binding transcriptional regulator	Putative regulator; Not classified	Putative LysR-family transcriptional regulator, function unknown	Null	b0768
pgl	blu, ybhE	6-phosphogluconolactonase	Orf; Not classified	6-phosphogluconolactonase, pentose phosphate shunt	Overexpression causes filamentous biofilm formation.	b0767
ymcE	sfa	cold shock gene	Phenotype; Not classified	Cold shock gene, function unknown; mistakenly thought to be sfa, which is the adjacent gene, now called gnsA	ymcE is transiently induced after a cold shock, dependent on the presence of PNPase. ymcE was misidentified as sfa in the Polissi et al. cold shock paper.	b0991
gnsA	sfa, yccL	putative phosphatidylethanolamine synthesis regulator	Null	Multicopy suppressor of null secG(Cs) and fabA6(Ts); overexpression increases unsaturated fatty acid content of phospholipids; gnsB paralog	This is the real sfa allele mistakenly assigned to the adjacent gene, which has now been assigned the ygene name ymcE	b4517
yccM	None	putative 4Fe-4S membrane protein	Null	Putative polyferredoxin	napH and yccM are paralogs.	b0992
mngA	hrsA	fused 2-O-a-mannosyl-D-glycerate specific PTS enzymes: IIA component/IIB component/IIC component	Enzyme; Proteins - translation and modification	2-O-alpha-mannosyl-D-glycerate transport, EIIABC component; PTS system; overproduction suppresses the defective ompC thermoresponse of a micF mutant	Null	b0731
mngB	ybgG	alpha-mannosidase	Enzyme; Not classified	Alpha-mannosidase, 2-O-alpha-mannosyl-D-glycerate catabolism	Null	b0732
nei	None	endonuclease VIII and 5-formyluracil/5-hydroxymethyluracil DNA glycosylase	Enzyme; DNA - replication, repair, restriction/modification	DNA glycosylase/apurinic lyase, deoxyinosine-specific; endonuclease VIII	There is some evidence from high-throughput studies that YbgIJK-Nei might be a protein complex.	b0714
cobU	None	cobinamide kinase and cobinamide phosphate guanylyltransferase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Cobalamin	Partial cobalamin biosynthesis pathway present in E. coli	Null	b1993
yeeH'	None	pseudogene	Null	Pseudogene, internal fragment	Defective remnant in ISW.	b4639
cobC	phpB	putative alpha-ribazole-5'-P phosphatase	Putative regulator; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Cobalamin	Probable alpha-ribazole-5'-phosphate phosphatase; potential partial cobalamin biosynthesis pathway	Primarily characterized in Salmonella.	b0638
nadD	fusB, ybeN	nicotinic acid mononucleotide adenylyltransferase, NAD(P)-dependent	Null	Nicotinate mononucleotide adenylyltransferase, NAD(P) biosynthesis	Null	b0639
yecJ	None	DUF2766 family protein	Null	DUF2766 family protein	Null	b4537
hlyE	clyA, hpr, sheA, ycgD	hemolysin E	Phenotype; Not classified	Latent secreted hemolysin E; regulated by SlyA, FNR and HN-S	HylE is secreted but has no signal peptide.	b1182
ybaP	None	TraB family protein	Null	TraB family protein	The N-terminal domain of YbaP has similarity to the molybdopterin-binding domain of MopB family proteins.	b0482
ybaQ	None	putative DNA-binding transcriptional regulator	Null	Predicted transcriptional regulator, function unknown	PF01381 family.	b0483
copA	ybaR	copper transporter	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Copper-, silver-translocating P-type ATPase efflux pump; involved in copper resistance; copper- and silver-inducible; regulated by copper-responsive CueR activator	Upregulated by GSNO in defined medium (anaerobic). HAD superfamily. CopA contains a putative phosphatase HAD domain: residues 516-740. CusF is a periplasmic copper-, silver-binding protein that may work with CopA. Alternatively, YobA may be a CopC-like periplasmic copper-binding protein that works with CopA.	b0484
glsA	glsA1, ybaS	glutaminase 1	Enzyme; l-glutamine catabolism	Glutaminase 1, GlsA1	GlsA and GadC form an acid resistance system sufficient to protect E. coli from acid stress in the pressence of glutamine (Lu, 2013). Early experiments suggesed that GlsA(YbaS) might contribute to acid resistance, as was later demonstrated (Brown, 2008). glsA(ybaS) is in the CueR regulon (Marbach, 2012). glsA(ybaS) may be in the GadE regulon; weak support (Marbach, 2012). Two glutaminases have been purified and biochemically characterized from E. coli B. 	b0485
ybaT	None	putative amino acid transporter	Putative transport; Not classified	Predicted amino acid transporter	The glsA-ybaT operon organisation and the PF13520 AA_permease_2 motif suggest that YbaT may be a glutamine or general amino acid transporter. A mini-Tn10 insertion in ybaT inhibits the reduction of selenate without altering the growth rate. ybaT is in the CueR regulon and adjacent to cueR (Marbach, 2012).	b0486
ppiD	ybaU	periplasmic folding chaperone, has an inactive PPIase domain	Putative factor; Not classified	Periplasmic folding chaperone, has an inactive PPIase domain	Contrary to previously reported results, PpiD does not have PPIase enzymatic activity, although it retains its PPIase substrate binding function (Weninger, 2009). PpiD has an N-terminal membrane anchor. A native membrane complex of YfgM and PpiD has been detected (Maddalo, 2011). An fkpA, surA, ppiB, ppiD quadruple mutant is viable (Justice, 2005). Heat-inducible.	b0441
ybaV	None	putative competence-suppressing periplasmic helix-hairpin-helix DNA-binding protein	Null	Putative competence-suppressing DNA-binding periplasmic protein; function unknown	YbaV is a predicted periplasmic protein required for cell-to-cell plasmid transfer that has a C-terminal ComEA-like tandem helix-hairpin-helix putative DNA-binding domain and may sequester incoming DNA in the periplasm, suppressing transformation efficiency (Matsuda, 2012). ybaV is predicted to have a CRP-S promoter co-regulated by both Crp and Sxy (Cameron, 2006). YbaV is predicted to have a 25 aa type I signal peptide.	b0442
fadM	tesC, ybaW	long-chain acyl-CoA thioesterase III	Enzyme; fatty acid degradation	Long-chain acyl-CoA thioesterase III	3,5-tetradecadienoyl-CoA is the preferred substrate for thioesterase III, which is induced by fatty acids, suggesting a role in beta-oxidation of fatty acids (Nie, 2008). fadM(ybaW) is part of the FadR regulon (Feng, 2009). FadM is a member of the HotDog superfamily of thioesterases and dehydratases (Pfam CL0050, PF03061; PDB 1NJK) (Dillon, 2004).	b0443
queC	ybaX	7-cyano-7-deazaguanine (preQ0) synthase; queuosine biosynthesis	Enzyme; Queuosine biosynthesis	7-cyano-7-deazaguanine (preQ0) synthase; queuosine biosynthesis	An E. coli queC mutant is deficient in converting preQ0 to preQ1 (Gaur, 2005). An E. coli queC mutant lacks quenosine and epoxyqueuosine (Miles, 2011). The orthologous B. subtilis QueC enzyme activity has been characterized in vitro (McCarty, 2009). Asn, Asp, Tyr, and His tRNA anticodons are modified by queuosine. A. viscosus ortholog ALU1 confers aluminum tolerance when cloned in E. coli (Jo, 1997). COG0603 predicts ATPase activity. tgt mutants lack queuosine and are have reduced survival in stationary phase. (Noguchi, 1982).	b0444
ybaY	None	outer membrane lipoprotein	Phenotype; Not classified	Novel verified lipoprotein, function unknown	The first 18 aa of YbaY are a type II signal peptide. ybaY is repressed by OxyS overexpression (Tjaden, 2006).	b0453
ybaZ	None	excision repair protein, alkyltransferase-like protein ATL	Null	Excision repair protein; alkyltransferase-like protein ATL; binds and enhances nucleotide excision repair of O(6)-alkylguanine; DNA-binding protein; degenerate Ada/Ogt cysteine methyltransferase paralog	YbaZ is homologous to methylated-DNA--protein-cysteine methyltransferases Ada and Ogt, but lacks the active site cysteine. YbaZ binds O(6)-alkylguanine residues in DNA and blocks alkyltransferase action; YbaZ does not remove methyl groups from O(6)-methylguanine-containing DNA nor does it have glycosylase or endonuclease activity (Margison, 2007). YbaZ preferentially binds DNA with an abasic site, has base-flipping activity, and binds HelD (Chen, 2008). YbaZ strongly enhances nucleotide excision repair of the large O(6)-alkylguanine adducts that are not good substrates for paralogs Ogt and Ada to remove (Mazon, 2009). 	b0454
cueR	ybbI	copper-responsive regulon transcriptional regulator	Putative transport; Not classified	Activator of copper-responsive regulon genes cueO and copA; MerR homolog	Although CueR is a soluble copper-binding protein, it was not detected using Cu(I)-MIRAGE, probably because it selectively binds Cu(I), most of which is oxidized to Cu(II) by CueO, and thus the amount of CueR bound to Cu(I) probably lies below the detection limit (Sevcenco, 2009; Sevcenco, 2012).	b0487
ybbJ	None	inner membrane protein; stimulator of the QmcA suppressor of ftsH-htpX	Null	Inner membrane protein; stimulates the ftsH htpX mutant suppressor activity of QmcA	qmcA and ybbJ constitute an operon. YbbJ is a NfeD/STOPP family protein, often operonic with PHB proteins.	b0488
qmcA	ybbK	PHB domain membrane-anchored putative protease	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Multicopy suppressor of ftsH htpX double mutant; membrane-anchored predicted protease with C-terminal cytoplasmic PHB domain	Prohibitin homology (PHB) domain. The PHB domain is also called the SPFH domain, named after the proteins Stomatin, Prohibitin, Flotillin and HflK/C (Tavernarakis, 1999; Morrow, 2005; Rivera-Milla, 2006; Browman, 2007). QmcA belongs to subfamily SPFH1a (Hinderhofer, 2009). QmcA is oligomeric and interacts with ftsH. QmcA suppressor activity, but not protein synthesis, is stimulated by downstream NfeD/STOPP family gene ybbJ. QmcA expression from the chromosome is detected, but must be insufficient for suppression. QmcA is not stably complexed with FtsH, but they do physically interact.	b0489
fetA	ybbL	iron export ABC transporter ATPase; peroxide resistance protein	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Cations	Iron export ABC transporter ATPase; peroxide resistance protein	FetAB confers peroxide resistance and exports excess iron; overexpression of FetAB increases peroxide resistance and fetA or fetB mutants are sensitive to peroxide stress (Nicolaou, 2013).	b0490
fetB	ybbM	iron export ABC transporter permease; peroxide resistance protein	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Cations	Iron export ABC transporter permease; peroxide resistance protein	FetAB confers peroxide resistance and exports excess iron; overexpression of FetAB increases peroxide resistance and fetA or fetB mutants are sensitive to peroxide stress (Nicolaou, 2013). FetA is an integral mebrane protein with the C-terminus inside the cytoplasm (Daley, 2005; Nicolaou, 2013).	b0491
ybbN	None	DnaK co-chaperone, thioredoxin-like protein	Putative enzyme; Not classified	DnaK co-chaperone, thioredoxin-like protein; probable DNA replicase folding chaperone; has SXXC not CXXC motif	YbbN is a co-chaperone for both DnaJKGrpE and GroESL(Lin, 2011). YbbN assists in refolding of DnaN, and ybbN mutants produce anucleated cells and have DNA replication defects (Le, 2011). YbbN has two tandem C-terminal TPR-like repeat domains. The function of YbbN as both an thiol-disulfide oxidoreductase and as a chaperone is controversial (Vlamis-Gardikas, 2008): YbbN has been reported to oxidize cysteines of RNase A and to have chaperone activity (Caldas, 2006), but this is partially contradicted by a report that YbbN cannot reduce oxidized insulin and has no chaperone activity on citrate synthase (Pan, 2006). This contradiction is substantially resolved by a followup to the Caldas (2006) study which found no evidence for YbbN oxidoreductase activity in vivo and and agree with Pan (2006) that there is no significant in vitro chaperone activity of YbbN alone on citrate syntase, but there is a strong stimulation of DnaK chaperone activity on citrate syntase, thus YbbN is a DnaK co-chaperone (Kthiri, 2008). YbbN binds DnaK and GroEL; ybbN mutants are sensitive to heat stress but not oxidative stress (Kthiri, 2008). HT_Cmplx38_Cyt: Usg+YbbN. otherPDB (S.typhimurium): 3QDN.	b0492
ybbO	None	 short-chain dehydrogenases/reductases (SDR) family protein	Putative enzyme; Not classified	COG1028 oxidoreductase family protein	Null	b0493
ybbP	None	putative ABC transporter permease	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Putative ABC transporter permease	Null	b0496
glxR	glxB1, ybbQ	tartronate semialdehyde reductase, NADH-dependent	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Tartronate semialdehyde reductase, glyoxylate-inducible, NADH-dependent	Null	b0509
allS	glxA1, ybbS	allD operon transcriptional activator	Regulator; Purine nitrogen catabolism	Transcriptional activator for the allD operon	Null	b0504
fsr	None	putative fosmidomycin efflux system protein	Putative transport; Not classified	Probable fosmidomycin exporter, membrane protein; overexpression confers fosmidomycin resistance	Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS).	b0479
aqpZ	bniP	aquaporin Z	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Other	Aquaporin Z, glycerol and water channel; RpoS regulon	AqpZ-dependent water permeability increases as cells enter stationary phase. The aqpZ-ybjD divergent operon promoter region binds FNR (Federowicz, 2014).	b0875
panE	apbA(S.t.)	2-dehydropantoate reductase, NADPH-specific	Phenotype; Not classified	2-dehydropantoate 2-reductase, NADPH-dependent; also known as ketopantoate reductase (KPR)	PanE is also indirectly involved in the alternative pathway for pyrimidine biosynthesis. Sequence verified by mass spectrometry (obs=33870), Met is not clipped. False positive lipoprotein prediction, unprocessed, verified by mass spectrometry.	b0425
yajL	thiJ	oxidative-stress-resistance chaperone	Null	Covalent chaperone for sulfenylated thiol proteins; confers resistance to oxidative stress, chaperone activity; mutant accumulates protein aggregates	The YajL chaperone forms mixed disulfides with target proteins, preferentially at sulfenylated cysteines (Le, 2012; Gautier, 2012). YajL stimulates refolding of citrate cynthase in vitro, and a yajL mutant has increased protein aggregation during aerobiosis, is sensitive to oxidative stress, and has reduced mRNA levels for the aggregated proteins (Kthiri, 2010). YajL has been mistakenly described as ThiJ, involved in thiamine metabolism. This phenotype is now attributed to the adjacent thiI gene (T. Begley, personal communication cited in Mueller et al., NAR 26:2606-10 (1998). C56 peptidase family; DJ-1/PARK7 superfamily; PfpI/HchA protease/chaperone family.	b0424
thiI	nuvA, yajJ, yajK	tRNA s(4)U8 sulfurtransferase	Enzyme; tRNA modification	tRNA s(4)U8 sulfurtransferase, activated by IscS; ThiS-thiocarboxylate (ThiS-COSH) synthesis; mutant is near-UV resistant	The 4-thiouridine modification of tRNA acts as a near UV sensor because it makes tRNA near-UV labile, blocking translation, inducing the stringent response and stopping growth. The synonym nuvA is assigned to thiI: a nuvA mutant is near-UV resistant and maps to 9.3' (Mueller, 1998). ThiI has rhodanase and THUMP domains. Two reports of thiI complementation of nuvC were noted in Taylor (1998): footnote 3 cites (Mueller, 1998), but that complemented "nuvC" allele was not the original nuvC allele but a thiI mutant with the same phenotype isolated using the same procedure; footnote 2 attributes the complementation to C. Kinsland and T. P. Begley, unpublished results, and these results ars still unpublished. ThiI probably transfers sulfur to adenylated substrates. Two components Factor A (NuvA, 9.3) and Factor B (NuvB, ~45') were originally shown to be required for tRNA s(4)U8 modification with NuvC being the pyridoxal phosphate requiring factor; despite the mapping discrepancy it seems likely that IscS (57.3') is Factor C (NuvC) and ThiI (9.3') is Factor A (NuvA) (Kambampati, 2000).	b0423
yqeK	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Part of T3SS PAI ETT2 remnant, function unknown	This gene is a remnant of the type three secretion system (T3SS) pathogenicity island ETT2. 18 kb of ETT2 has been deleted from K-12, leaving 10 kb of the presumably non-functional T3SS ETT2 remaining. 	b2849
nudI	yfaO	nucleoside triphosphatase	Null	Nucleoside triphosphatase, pyrimidine dNTPs preferred	Null	b2251
torZ	bisZ	trimethylamine N-oxide reductase system III, catalytic subunit	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism	Periplasmic trimethylamine oxide (TMAO) reductase; also has biotin sulfoxide and DMSO reductase activities; respiratory system	Verified Tat substrate: TorZ has a Tat/Sec (Class II) 31 aa signal peptide (Tullman-Ercek, 2007). Signal peptide is a TatC-dependent export substrate (Gon, 2000).	b1872
torY	yecK	TMAO reductase III (TorYZ), cytochrome c-type subunit	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Cytochrome c homolog required for periplasmic reduction of TMAO by TorZ; respiratory system	Null	b1873
yedK	yedG	DUF159 family protein	Null	DUF159 family protein, function unknown	Null	b1931
yedL	None	GNAT family putative N-acetyltransferase	Null	GNAT family putative N-acetyltransferase	Null	b1932
yedN'	yedM	pseudogene, IpaH/YopM family	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction, IpaH/YopM family	An intact allele is Z3023 of E. coli OH157:H7 (UniProtKB: Q8X520). Frameshifts at codons 104 and 331 were hypothetically reconstructed. Stop codon 268 is translated as X in the reconstruction.	b4495
emrK	None	multidrug resistance efflux pump membrane fusion protein	Putative transport; Drug/analog sensitivity	EmrKY-TolC multidrug resistance efflux pump, membrane fusion protein; overexpression resistance to deoxycholate; signal anchored membrane protein	Mutations in emrK have a hyperlethality phenotype when cells are stressed; EmrK is a protein that reduces the lethal effects of stress (Han, 2010). EvgAS regulon.	b2368
emrY	None	putative multidrug efflux system	Putative transport; Drug/analog sensitivity	EmrKY-TolC multidrug resistance efflux pump; overexpression resistance to deoxycholate	Mutations in emrY have a hyperlethality phenotype when cells are stressed; EmrY is a protein that reduces the lethal effects of stress (Han, 2010). EvgAS regulon. Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS).	b2367
yfdE	None	acetyl-CoA:oxalate CoA-transferase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Acetyl-CoA:oxalate CoA-transferase	EvgAS regulon. The frc-oxc-yfdVE operon is adjacent and convergent on evgAS. Frc paralog.	b2371
ygaM	None	putative membrane-anchored DUF883 family ribosome-binding protein	Null	Ribosome-binding protein, function unknown; probably membrane-anchored; DUF883 family	YgaM binds ribosomes and is expressed mainly in stationary phase (Yoshida, 2012). DUF883 family. YgaM, ElaB and YqjD are paralogs predicted to have C-terminal inner membrane anchors (Luirink, 2011).	b2672
nrdH	ygaN	hydrogen donor for NrdEF electron transport system; glutaredoxin-like protein	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Thioredoxin, glutaredoxin, glutathione	NrdH-redoxin reducing oxidized NrdEF	NrdH-redoxin has a glutaredoxin-like protein sequence but is reduced by thioredoxin reductase in vivo, consistent with its lack of a GSH binding site motif (Stehr, 2001; Gon, 2006) In the absence of thioredoxin reductase and NrdH-redoxin, glutaredoxin 1 can partially replace NrdH-redoxin (Gon, 2006). Purified NrdH-redoxin was N-terminally sequenced to show the initial Met is not clipped, but this is not counted as verification of the ATG since the purified protein was made with a foreign RBS. Upregulated by GSNO in defined medium (anaerobic). Fur regulon.	b2673
nrdI	ygaO	NrdEF cluster assembly flavodoxin	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Thioredoxin, glutaredoxin, glutathione	Flavodoxin required for NrdEF cluster assembly	NrdI binds NrdF and is involved in NrdEF Mn(+3) dimetallocofactor asssembly, helping to disciminate against Fe(+2) insertion (Cotruvo, 2010).	b2674
ygaP	None	DUF2892 family inner membrane rhodanese	Null	DUF2892 family inner membrane rhodanese; tributyltin-inducible via YgaU	YgaP has a rhodanese domain and sulfur transferase (rhodanese) activity in vitro, F. Ahmed, Ph.D. thesis, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, VA (2003), cited in Gueune (2008).	b2668
yqgE	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Function unknown, low abundance protein; homologous to P. aeruginosa AlgH regulatory protein	Null	b2948
yqgF	None	putative Holliday junction resolvase	Null	Putative anti-termination factor for Rho-dependent terminators	A yqgF-Ts mutant is sensitive to Rho and NusA overproduction and has reduced transcription of genes following Rho terminators; the reduced transcription is increased in the presence of the Rho inhibitor bicylomycin (Iwamoto, 2012). YqgF is an essential gene. YqgF has an RNase H-like fold and is related to the Holliday junction resolvases RuvC and RusA.	b2949
glcF	gox, yghL	glycolate oxidase 4Fe-4S iron-sulfur cluster subunit	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	Glycolate oxidase 4Fe-4S iron-sulfur cluster subunit	The GlcF subunit of glycolate oxidase has an N-terminal 4Fe-4S dicluster domain (pfam PF12838) with 8 conserved Cys residues; GlcF also has two C-terminal cysteine-rich domains (Pfam PF02754) each with invariant CCG motifs and two conserved single Cys residues. glcF and glpC are homologous horizontal transfer (HT) genes.	b4467
mhpE	None	4-hyroxy-2-oxovalerate/4-hydroxy-2-oxopentanoic acid aldolase, class I	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	4-Hydroxy-2-oxovalerate aldolase; utilizes MHP	Null	b0352
mhpT	yaiK	3-hydroxyphenylpropionic transporter	Putative transport; Not classified	3-hydroxyphenylpropionic acid transporter	MhpT overexpression reduces intracellular arabinose, but not xylose, concentration; other compounds were not tested (Koita, 2012). Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS).	b0353
yaiL	None	DUF2058 family protein	Putative enzyme; Not classified	DUF2058 family protein, function unknown	Null	b0354
frmB	yaiM	S-formylglutathione hydrolase	Enzyme; Formaldehyde degradation	S-formylglutathione hydrolase, formaldehyde degradation	FrmB also has p-nitrophenyl C2-C6 fatty acid ester and a-naphthyl acetate carboxylesterase activities in vitro. The frmRAB operon is negatively regulated by frmR, is induced by formaldehyde, and probably degrades formaldehyde. FrmB is 50% identical to P. denitrificans S-formylglutathione hydrolase. FrmB and YeiG are 50% identical paralogs; double mutant is formaldehyde sensitive; this may explain why an frmB single mutant did not have a formadehyde phenotype when tested on Biolog plates (Herring, 2004). The amino terminal half of FrmB is homologus to the C-terminal half of YieL. S9 peptidase family; YeiG or FrmB are not in MEROPS yet, but it has homologs.	b0355
frmR	yaiN	regulator protein that represses frmRAB operon	Null	Negative regulator of the frmRAB operon	The frmRAB operon is negatively regulated by frmR, is induced by formaldehyde, and probably degrades formaldehyde. An amber suppressor allows readthrough of frmR, adding 7 aa, which inactivates FrmR, causing stimulation of frmRAB transcription. frmR and rcnR are paralogs.	b0357
yaiO	None	outer membrane protein	Null	Outer membrane protein, function unknown	The predicted 19 aa signal peptide of YaiO is consistent with an observed secB-dependent precursor cleavage that is blocked by azide (Marani, 2006).	b0358
yaiP	None	putative family 2 glycosyltransferase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Predicted family 2 glycosyltransferase, function unknown	YaiP overlaps the N-terminus of YaiX by 47 codons, which is unusual.	b0363
tauB	ssiB, yaiQ	taurine ABC transporter ATPase	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	Taurine ABC transporter ATPase	Null	b0366
tauA	ssiA, yaiR	taurine ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	Taurine ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein	Cbl regulon. tauA and ssuA are paralogs.	b0365
tauC	ssiC, yaiJ	taurine ABC transporter permease	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	Taurine ABC transporter permease	Null	b0367
yaiS	None	putative PIG-L family deacetylase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Predicted PIG-L family deacetylase	YaiS has the Pfam PF02585 signature.	b0364
dtpD	ybgH	dipeptide and tripeptide permease D	Transport; Not classified	Dipeptide and tripeptide permease D	Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS).	b0709
ybgI	None	GTP cyclohydrolase-like radiation resistance protein; metal-binding	Putative enzyme; Not classified	GTP cyclohydrolase-like radiation resistance protein; metal-binding	YbgI belongs to the GTP cyclohydrolase 1 type 2/NIF3 family (InterPro IPR002678; Pfam PF01784) whose most characterized prokaryotic member is the Helicobacter pylori GTP cyclohydrolase 1 type 2 (HP0959) (Choi, 2013). A ybgI mutation is one of many selected in a strain evolved for resistance to high levels of ionizing radiation; a single ybgI deletion mutant has a 2-3 orders of magnitude drop in survival after radiation exposure as compared to a ybgI+ strain (Byrne, 2014). Although YbgI is labeled as a putative GTP cyclohydrolase in many annotations of YbgI orthologs, there are several reasons to consider a substrate related to but distinct from GTP for YbgI. First, GTP cyclohydrolase 1 activity has been purified from E. coli and only FolE was isolated (Yim, 1976). Second, a folE mutant has a phenotype that cannot be satisfied by a presumably still intact copy of ybgI (Klaus, 2005). Third, the amino acid sequence identity between HP0959 and YbgI is only 27% (29/105) and only the last 101 amino acids align to YbgI using blastp; this is usually considered as too divergent to assume isofunctional orthology. Fourth, YbgI provides significant protection from radiation damage and may be involved in the degradation of radiation-damaged nucleotides; ybgI linkage (genetic neighborhood) to two genes involved in DNA repair, nei and phr, is conserved across many bacterial genomes perhaps indicating that they work together; consistent with this hypothesis the Phr product is a DNA photolyase that repairs cyclobutylpyrimidine dimers in DNA and Nei is part of the damaged base excision repair (BER) pathway. There is some evidence from high-throughput studies that YbgIJK-Nei might be a protein complex. YbgI is a member of the widely conserved protein family UPF0135. YbgI has a dinuclear metal site. HT_Cmplx40_Cyt: YbgI+YqhD.	b0710
ybgJ	None	putative allophanate hydrolase, subunit 1	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Putative allophanate hydrolase, subunit 1	There is some evidence from high-throughput studies that YbgIJK-Nei might be a protein complex.	b0711
ybgK	None	putative allophanate hydrolase, subunit 2	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Putative allophanate hydrolase, subunit 2	There is some evidence from high-throughput studies that YbgIJK-Nei might be a protein complex.	b0712
ybgL	None	UPF0271 family protein	Phenotype; Not classified	Function unknown, low abundance protein, UPF0271 family	Null	b0713
ypjI'	None	pseudogene, CP4-57 putative prophage remnant	Phage or Prophage Related	Pseudogene reconstruction, CP4-57 putative defective prophage	UPF0401 family. In frame stop codons 8 and 11 were translated as Xs. A frameshift at codon 60 was hypothetically corrected in the protein sequence.	b4644
abrB	ybgN	regulator of aidB expression; inner membrane protein	Putative transport; Not classified	Regulator of aidB expression; inner membrane protein	Null	b0715
ybgO	None	putative fimbrial protein	Null	Fimbrial protein, function unknown	The first 23 aa of YgbO are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. YbgO is encoded in the ybgDQPO fimbrial operon. The C-terminal domain of paralogs yqiI and ybgO may be distantly related to FimA.	b0716
ybgP	None	putative periplasmic pilin chaperone	Putative factor; Surface structures	Putative periplasmic pilus chaperone, function unknown	Probable false positive lipoprotein prediction, Cys not conserved. First 20 aa are a predicted type I signal peptide. YbgP has Ig-like domains: pfam PF00345 aligns to N-terminal residues 21-143, and pfam PF02753 aligns to C-terminal residues 150-223. 	b0717
ybgQ	None	putative outer membrane protein	Putative membrane; Not classified	Putative outer membrane fimbrial subunit export usher protein; function unknown	FimD family. First 21 aa are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b0718
ybhF	None	putative ABC transporter ATPase	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative ABC transporter ATPase	The putative ybiHybhGFSR operon encodes a predicted transcriptional regulator (YbiH) and four proteins of a predicted ABC-type transporter complex YbhGFSR, containing two ABC permease family members (YbhSR), a predicted ATP-binding cassette protein (YbhF), and a predicted membrane fusion protein (YbhG) usually associated with RND-type efflux pumps. No predicted periplasmic binding protein is associated with this predicted ABC transporter YbhGFSR, suggesting that it is an exporter, which is consistent with the presence of a membrane fusion protein (YbhG) allowing for export transit across the periplasm. YbhG (f332) was mistakenly predicted to be a periplasmic binding protein, leading to the mis-classification of YbhGFSR as a putative importer (Linton, 1998).	b0794
ybhG	None	putative membrane fusion protein (MFP) component of efflux pump, membrane anchor	Putative membrane; Not classified	Putative membrane fusion protein (MFP), function unknown; probable exporter YbhGFSR; signal anchor	The putative ybiHybhGFSR operon encodes a predicted transcriptional regulator (YbiH) and four proteins of a predicted ABC-type transporter complex YbhGFSR, containing two ABC permease family members (YbhSR), a predicted ATP-binding cassette protein (YbhF), and a predicted membrane fusion protein (YbhG) usually associated with RND-type efflux pumps. No predicted periplasmic binding protein is associated with this predicted ABC transporter YbhGFSR, suggesting that it is an exporter, which is consistent with the presence of a membrane fusion protein (YbhG) allowing for export transit across the periplasm. YbhG (f332) was mistakenly predicted to be a periplasmic binding protein (noted as subfamily "v"), leading to the mis-classification of YbhGFSR as a putative importer (Linton, 1998). YbhG has a predicted 20 aa signal anchor.	b0795
ybiX	None	Fe(II)-dependent oxygenase superfamily protein	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Fe(II)-dependent oxygenase superfamily protein; function unknown	YbiX is related to PiuC, an iron-regulated P. aeruginosa protein. Fur regulon. 3/121 YbiX peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is not removed (Maillet, 2007).	b0804
fiu	ybiL	catecholate siderophore receptor	Membrane; Outer membrane constituents	TonB-dependent ferric iron outer membrane transporter; siderophore receptor for ferri-dihydroxybenzoylserine, ferri-dihydroxybenzoate and other catecholate siderophores; surface receptor for colicins G, H, and E492	Fiu transports catechol-substituted cephalosporins. Fiu is in the Fur regulon. The fiu promoter region binds ArcA and fiu is repressed by ArcA (Federowicz, 2014). Fiu is regulated during colony morphogenesis. The first 31 aa of Fiu are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. 	b0805
mcbA	ybiM	colanic acid mucoidy stimulation protein	Null	Stimulates colanic acid mucoidy, YhcN family, periplasmic; suppresses biofilm formation; repressed by McbR	The first 22 aa of McbA are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. Periplasmic protein. MqsR activates McbR transcription.	b0806
rlmF	ybiN	23S rRNA m(6)A1618 methyltransferase, SAM-dependent	Enzyme; rRNA modification	23S rRNA m(6)A1618 methyltransferase, SAM-dependent	YbiN is rlmF; rlmF- has a slow growth phenotype (Sergiev, 2008).	b0807
ybiO	None	mechanosensitive channel protein, intermediate conductance	Putative transport; Not classified	Mechanosensitive channel protein, intermediate (MscS-like) conductance	YbiO is a novel mechanosensitive channel protein of intermediate (MscS-like) conductance and is transcriptionally regulated by NaCl (Edwards, 2012). mscS, mscK(kefA), mscM(yjeP), ybiO, ybdG and ynaI are paralogs of the MscS family. RpoS regulon.	b0808
opgE	ybiP	OPG biosynthetic transmembrane phosphoethanolamine transferase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	OPG biosynthetic phosphoethanolamine transferase; transmembrane ; EptAB family	OpgE is the OPG biosynthetic transmembrane phosphoethanolamine transferase responsible for adding the phosphoethanolamine substituents to the OPG backbone in the periplasm (Bontemps-Gallo, 2013). Osmoregulated periplasmic glucans (OPGs) were originally called membrane-derived oligosaccharides opgE(ybiP) mutants do not have defects in LPS structure as determined by mass spectrometery, indicating that OpgE(YbiP) modifies a substrate other than LPS (Klein, 2013).	b0815
mntR	ybiQ	Mn(2+)-responsive manganese regulon transcriptional regulator	Regulator; Not classified	Mn(2+)-responsive manganese regulon transcriptional regulator	Null	b0817
ybiR	None	putative ArsB family transporter; inner membrane protein	Null	Putative ArsB family transporter; inner membrane protein	YbiR is a member of the IT (Ion Transporter) superfamily (Prakash, 2003). YbiR is amember of the ST(3) structural class based on hydropathy profile (Lolkema, 2003). YbiR is closely related to the arsB transporter family and is also related to the CitT and CitM families of citrate transporters. A profile specific to the YbiR family (cd01117) has been created in the CD database at the NCBI.	b0818
ldtB	ybiS	L,D-transpeptidase linking Lpp to murein	Enzyme; Murein sacculus, peptidoglycan	L,D-transpeptidase linking Lpp to murein, periplasmic	LdtB(YbiS) has an active site cysteine that is kept reduced by DsbG and DsbC to reverse sulfenic acid formation (Depuydt, 2009). The ldtB-ybiT divergent operon promoter region binds FNR; ldtB(ybiS) expression is repressed by FNR (Federowicz, 2014).	b0819
ybiT	None	ABC-F family putative regulatory ATPase	Putative factor; Not classified	ABC-F family putative regulatory ATPase, function unknown	YbiT is a procaryotic ABC-F family member defined by two ABC transporter-related predicted ATP-binding domains (Pfam:PF0005) joined by a linker domain (Pfam: PF12848); other ABC-F family members include eucaryotic translation-related factors and the E. coli K-12 proteins EttA, Uup, and YheS (Boël, 2014; Chen, 2014). The E. chrysanthemi YbiT ortholog plays a role in plant infective fitness. The ldtB-ybiT divergent operon promoter region binds FNR and ybiT expression is activated by FNR (Federowicz, 2014). 3/102 YbiT peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is not removed (Maillet, 2007).	b0820
ybiU	None	DUF1479 family protein	Null	DUF1479 family protein	The ybiU promoter region has an ArcA binding site (Federowicz, 2014).	b0821
ybiV	supH	sugar phosphatase; fructose-1-P/ribose-5-P/glucose-6-P phosphatase	Null	Sugar phosphatase; preference for fructose-1-P, ribose-5-P and glucose-6-P; phosphoramidase and acetyl phosphatase; HAD12	HAD superfamily. The natural substrate(s) and physiological role of YbiV is unknown. In vitro activities demonstrated by Kuznetsova et al. (2005, 2006). A clone of ybiV was isolated as a multicopy suppresssor of a lethal ygjD deficiency (Handford, 2009).	b0822
ybiW	pflF	putative pyruvate formate lyase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Pyruvate formate-lyase homolog, function unknown	The fsa-ybiYW divergent operon promoter region binds FNR and ArcA (Federowicz, 2014).	b0823
ispU	rth, uppS, yaeS	undecaprenyl pyrophosphate synthase	Null	Undecaprenyl pyrophosphate synthase; dimeric	Null	b0174
gloB	yafR	hydroxyacylglutathione hydrolase	Putative enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	Glyoxalase II, hydroxyacylglutathione hydrolase, Zn(2+) cofactor	OtherPDB (S.typhimurium): 2QED.	b0212
yafS	None	putative S-adenosyl-L-methionine-dependent methyltransferase	Null	Predicted SAM-dependent methyltransferase, function unknown	Null	b0213
yafT	None	lipoprotein	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Novel verified lipoprotein, function unknown	The first 18 aa of YafT are a type II signal peptide.	b0217
yafU'	None	pseudogene	Null	Pseudogene, C-terminal fragment; overexpressed fragment localized to inner membrane	A compete YafU is predicted to be 204 aa, using sequence from Shigella sonnei 53G, unfinished, Sanger Center, and many subsequent unfinished E. coli and Shigella genomes. A deletion has apparently removed the N-terminus of YafU in K-12. The predicted complete sequence of YafU is : MTEFDDNGKIIFNLNALKYTKASYFEILGEKYIKITTSSPWLLEKLGKYIFSSRAPQVLELAIGWRGALSESIKGVKFCIWFSVAWRTIEFIMSSERDLVNFLGDFSMDVAKAVIAGGVATAIGSLTSFACVSFGFPVILVGGAILLTGIVCTVVLNEIDAQCHLSEKLKYAIRDGLKRQQELDKWKRENMTPFLYVLNTPPVI	b0218
yafV	None	putative NAD(P)-binding C-N hydrolase family amidase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Predicted C-N hydrolase family amidase, NAD(P)-binding, function unknown	YafV is a member of the C-N hydrolase family (Pfam PF00795).	b0219
yafW	None	CP4-6 prophage; antitoxin of the YkfI-YafW toxin-antitoxin system	Phage or Prophage Related	Antitoxin component of toxin-antitoxin protein pair YkfI-YafW; CP4-6 putative prophage remnant	Null	b0246
yafX	None	CP4-6 prophage; uncharacterized protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Function unknown, CP4-6 putative prophage remnant	Null	b0248
yafY	None	lipoprotein, inner membrane; degP regulator; CP4-6 prophage	Phage or Prophage Related	Inner membrane lipoprotein, function unknown; overproduction stimulates degP expression; CP4-6; putative prophage remnant	yfjS and yafY are homologs. The first 17 aa of YafY are a type II signal peptide (Matsuyama, unpublished, cited in Miyadai, 2004). Although overproduction of YafY induces degP expression, YjfS does not; chimeric protein experiments demonstrate that the N- and C- termini of YafY have the degP stimulatory determinants (Miyadai, 2004). Originally, the annotation of yafY was fused to the upstream pseudogene ykfK. It is possible that a YkfK-YafW chimeric pseudogene product is made in vivo, but no function would be expected since cleavage of the type II signal is likely to be blocked in any chimeric protein synthesized. Expression of the native YafY lipoprotein gene in the chromosome has not yet been reported. E. coli B has a third protein in this family (UniProtKB: A2UFU7), 55% identical to YafY and YfjS, that demonstrates conservation of the shorter ORFs and their lipoprotein signals in this novel prophage gene family.	b0251
yafZ	None	CP4-6 prophage; conserved protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Function unknown, CP4-6 putative prophage remnant	Null	b0252
ykfA	None	CP4-6 prophage; putative GTP-binding protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Putative GTP-binding protein, function unknown, CP4-6; putative prophage remnant	Paralogous to yeeP and yfjP.	b0253
perR	None	CP4-6 prophage; putative DNA-binding transcriptional regulator	Phage or Prophage Related	Predicted DNA-binding transcriptional regulator; CP4-6 putative defective prophage	The function identified in Genbank U57080 for PerR is that it is a regulatory gene for peroxide resistance in stationary phase (Loewen P.C., Switala J., Volkert M.R., Peroxide sensitivity genes of E. coli, unpublished 1996). LysR family.	b0254
ykfC'	None	CP4-6 prophage; conserved protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Pseudogene, retron-type reverse transcriptase family, CP4-6; putative defective prophage; N-terminal fragment	Null	b0258
mmuP	ykfD	CP4-6 prophage; putative S-methylmethionine transporter	Phage or Prophage Related	S-methylmethionine permease, CP4-6 putative prophage remnant	Met regulon.	b0260
mmuM	yagD	CP4-6 prophage; S-methylmethionine:homocysteine methyltransferase	Phage or Prophage Related	S-methylmethionine:(seleno)homocysteine methyltransferase; CP4-6 putative prophage remnant	Met regulon.	b0261
yagE	None	2-keto-3-deoxy gluconate (KDG) aldolase; CP4-6 prophage	Phage or Prophage Related	2-keto-3-deoxy gluconate (KDG) aldolase, tetrameric; CP4-6 putative prophage remnant	Overexpression of YagE confers resistance to several antibiotics, including norfloxacin, ampicillin and streptomycin (Bhaskar, 2011).	b0268
yagF	None	CP4-6 prophage; dehydratase family protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Predicted dehydratase, function unknown, CP4-6 prophage; thymol sensitivity determinant	A transposon insertion in yagF confers thymol resistance (Shapira, 2007). yjhG, yagF, ilvD and edd are paralogs.	b0269
yagG	None	CP4-6 prophage; putative sugar transporter	Phage or Prophage Related	Putative sugar symporter, function unknown, CP4-6; putative prophage remnant	yagGH is predicted to be an operon involved in uptake and catabolism of an unknown sugar substrate. Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS).	b0270
yagH	None	CP4-6 prophage; putative xylosidase/arabinosidase	Phage or Prophage Related	Putative beta-xylosidase, function unknown, CP4-6; putative prophage remnant	yagGH is predicted to be an operon involved in uptake and catabolism of an unknown sugar substrate.	b0271
yjjZ	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Function unknown; Fur regulon	Null	b4567
yagI	None	CP4-6 prophage; putative DNA-binding transcriptional regulator	Phage or Prophage Related	Function unknown, CP4-6 putative prophage remnant	Null	b0272
abgB	ydaI	p-aminobenzoyl-glutamate hydrolase, B subunit	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	p-Aminobenzoyl-glutamate hydrolase, B subunit; PGH; manganese-dependent; required for p-aminobenzoyl-glutamate utilization	abgAB expression is required for catabolism to feed p-aminobenzoate auxotrophs (Hussein, 1998; Carter, 2007). AbgAB (PGH) catalyzes the hydrolysis of p-aminobenzoyl-glutamate to p-aminobenzoate (Carter, 2007; Green, 2010). The abg operon is silent and an AbgR inducer has not been found (Hussein, 1998; Carter, 2007). AbgB is a member of the M20 peptidase family. abgA and abgB are paralogs. AbgABT does not degrade dipeptides; the physiological role of abgABT should be clarified when the inducer for AbgR is elucidated (Green, 2010).	b1337
abgA	ydaJ	p-aminobenzoyl-glutamate hydrolase, A subunit	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	p-Aminobenzoyl-glutamate hydrolase, A subunit; PGH; manganese-dependent; required for p-aminobenzoyl-glutamate utilization	abgAB expression is required for catabolism to feed p-aminobenzoate auxotrophs (Hussein, 1998; Carter, 2007). AbgAB (PGH) catalyzes the hydrolysis of folate metabolite p-aminobenzoyl-glutamate to p-aminobenzoate (Carter, 2007; Green, 2010). The abg operon is silent and an AbgR inducer has not been found (Hussein, 1998; Carter, 2007). AbgA is a member of the M20 peptidase family. abgA and abgB are paralogs. AbgABT does not degrade dipeptides; the physiological role of abgABT should be clarified when the inducer for AbgR is elucidated (Green, 2010).	b1338
abgR	ydaK	putative DNA-binding transcriptional regulator of abgABT operon	Putative regulator; Not classified	Predicted regulator of the abgABT operon	The abg operon is silent and an AbgR inducer has not been found (Hussein, 1998; Carter, 2007). LysR family.	b1339
smrA	ydaL	DNA endonuclease	Null	DNA endonuclease, function unknown	SmrA(YdaL) has DNA endonuclease activity (Gui, 2011). The two E. coli Smr proteins were identified and named smr based on homology to the C-terminal domain of MutS2 which has an N-terminal domain homologous to MutS but is not found in E. coli; mutS2 is usually found only in strains lacking smr genes (Moreira, 1999). Although the mnemonic for Smr is small mutS-related, mutS2-related is used since the Smr proteins do not have a region homologous to MutS itself.	b1340
ydaM	None	diguanylate cyclase, csgD regulator	Null	Diguanylate cyclase, csgD regulator; also regulates GGDEF protein YaiC(AdrA)	YdaM has an N-terminal PAS domain with a second PAS domain followed by a PAC domain then a C-terminal diguanylate cyclase GGDEF domain; there may be a degenerate PAC structural domain between the first and second PAS domains since PAC domains are usually associated C-terminal to PAS domains. RpoS regulon (Weber, 2006). YdaM expression is thermoregulated and may act as a thermosensor for curli control (Weber, 2006). YdaM/Gmr(YciR) constitute an RpoS-regulated c-di-GMP synthesis/degradation module inversely regulated by Hns and controlling the expression of curli genes (Weber, 2006). YdaM has diguanylate cyclase activity in vitro (Weber, 2006).	b1341
ydaN	zntB(S.t.)	putative Zn(II) transporter	Null	Zn(II) transporter	YdaN has been characterized as a zinc transporter in Salmonella, but no experiments have yet been done in E. coli (Worlock, 2002).	b1342
ttcA	stcA, ydaO	tRNA s(2)C32 thioltransferase, iron–sulfur cluster protein	Putative enzyme; Not classified	tRNA s(2)C32 thioltransferase, iron–sulfur cluster protein; dimeric; forms 2-thiocytidine	TtcA has ATP-dependent tRNA s(2)C32 thioltransferase activity in vitro (Bouvier, 2014). TtcA has been shown to be required for the formation of 2-thiocytidine s(2)C32 in Salmonella and E. coli (Jager, 2004). 2-thiocytidine s(2)C32 is present in three Arg tRNAs (CCG, UCU, ICG) and in Ser tRNA(GCU). The attachment site of Rac is a 26 bp repeat region flanking Rac: 1409923-1409948 and 1432983-1433008 (A. J. Clark, pers. comm., June, 1998). The ends of Rac are marked at the left end of these repeat regions to delineate attB and attP. This Rac integration event is within the ttcA gene; the first 17 aa of TtcA are Rac prophage-derived. The ttcC' pseudogene is the remnant 17 aa displaced from the original chromosomal ttcA gene. 25 bp encoding four mismatches immediately preceed the 26 bp exact repeat. Representative of both alleles are found in sequenced E. coli and Shigell genomes. This is analogous to e14 integration into the icd gene producing the icdC' remnant pseudogene.	b1344
intR	ydaP	Rac prophage; integrase	Phage or Prophage Related	Integrase gene, Rac prophage	Null	b1345
ydaQ	None	Rac prophage; conserved protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Putative exisionase, Rac prophage	YdaQ is a member of the DUF1233 family of putative exisionases.	b1346
racR	cohR, ydaR	Rac prophage; putative DNA-binding transcriptional regulator	Phage or Prophage Related	Rac prophage repressor	racR encodes a functional repressor of the Rac prophage, personal communications, A.J. Clark, February, 1994, (preliminary results), and June, 1998. Rac integrase and repressor function and the Rac prophage can be induced to excise from the E. coli chromosome, but does not form viable virions. racR was identified in a personal communication of unpublished DNA sequence (2527 bp) and annotation from A.J. Clark, H. Samra, J. Li, C.C. Chu, C.S. Laufer and J.B. Hays, November, 1993; revised June, 1996. Although RacR does not show significant sequence homology to phage lambda cI repressor, it is approximately the same size, also has a predicted HTH motif, and is divergent from a cro	b1356
ydaS	None	Rac prophage; putative DNA-binding transcriptional regulator	Phage or Prophage Related	Putative Cro-like repressor, Rac prophage	The prediction that YdaS and YdaT form a toxin/antitoxin pair was tested and YdaST is not a toxin/antitoxin pair (Sevin, 2007; Christensen-Dalsgaard, 2010). YdaS has a likely false positive signal peptide prediction of 22 aa.	b1357
ydaT	None	Rac prophage; uncharacterized protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Required for swarming phenotype; Rac prophage	The prediction that YdaS and YdaT form a toxin/antitoxin pair was tested and YdaST do not form a toxin/antitoxin pair (Sevin, 2007; Christensen-Dalsgaard, 2010).	b1358
ydaU	None	Rac prophage; conserved protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Rac prophage, function unknown	Null	b1359
ydaV	None	Rac prophage; putative DNA replication protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Rac prophage, function unknown	Null	b1360
ydaW'	None	Rac prophage; pseudogene, DNA-binding protein family	Phage or Prophage Related	Pseudogene, N-terminal fragment, Rac prophage	Null	b1361
rzpR'	Rz, ydaX	pseudogene, Rac prophage; Bacteriophage Rz lysis protein family	Phage or Prophage Related	Pseudogene, Rz homolog, Rac prophage	Null	b1362
ydaY'	None	pseudogene, Rac prophage	Phage or Prophage Related	Pseudogene, Rac prophage	An intact version of YdaY is found in E. coli E22 (GenBank gi:75259491). The first 33 aa appear to be truncated by a deletion that also removed the C-terminal region of the adjacent ynaK gene. An in-frame stop is at codon 117 of the truncated, reconstructed pseudogene, represented by an X.	b1366
tmpR'	ynaA	Rac prophage; pseudogene, tail protein family	Phage or Prophage Related	Pseudogene, tail tape measure protein, Rac prophage; N-terminal fragment	The defective Rac prophage pseudogene tmpR'(ynaA)' encodes the first 311 residues of a predicted tail tape measure protein; intact 1077 residue alleles of TmpR(YnaA) are present in the prophages of many other E. coli strains, e.g. UniProt L4J240. Protein H is the phage lambda tail length-determining protein and it is cleaved to form protein H*, a minor tail protein (Katsura, 1984).	b1368
stfR	ynaB	Rac prophage; putative tail fiber protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Side-tail fiber protein, Rac prophage	Null	b1372
tfaR	ynaC	Rac prophage; putative tail fiber assembly protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Phage lambda tail fiber assembly gene homolog, Rac prophage	Induced during biofilm formation.	b1373
pinR	ynaD	Rac prophage; putative site-specific recombinase	Phage or Prophage Related	Predicted DNA-invertase, Rac prophage	Null	b1374
ynaE	None	cold shock protein, Rac prophage	Phage or Prophage Related	Cold shock gene, function unknown, Rac prophage	YnaE differs from YdfK by one residue. ydfK expression has been shown to be regulated by a 5' UTR thermosensor (Raghavan, 2011). The 349 nt preceding ynaE is 98% identical to the ydfK 5' UTR thermosensor with only six mismatches and therefore the ynaE and ydfK 5' UTRs are probably isofunctional thermosensors.	b1375
ompL	yshA	outer membrane porin L; putative sulpholipid porin	Null	Outer membrane porin L; putative sulpholipid porin	OmpL forms pores in reconstituted proteoliposomes that allow the diffusion of small sugars such as glucose, galactose and arabinose, but not maltose, indicating a small pore size; cysteine, tetraglycine and reduced glutathione permeate through OmpL pores rapidly but arabinose is transported at one fifth the rate of OmpF-mediated diffusion suggesting that OmpL is not a sugar-specific channel (Dartigalongue, 2000). OmpL has been proposed to be a sulpholipid porin because it might be the last gene in the yih(squ) operon encoding the sulphoglycolysis pathway; an ompL mutant can still utilize sulphoquinovose (SQ) (Denger, 2014). The cysteine and glutathione transport through OmpL is consistent with sulphoquinovose or sulpholipid diffusion but the small pore size might not be consistent with sulpholipid diffusion; if OmpL is a sulphoquinovose (SQ) porin, it is not required for SQ utilization; alternatively sulpholipids may be imported through an unknown lipid importer. An ompL null mutation has been reported to suppress dsbA mutant phenotypes, exhibit mild DTT sensitivity, slow growth and be M13 resistant, but these findings have been subsequently refuted (Dartigalongue, 2000; Sardesai, 2003).	b3875
ompN	ynaG	outer membrane pore protein N, non-specific	Putative membrane; Not classified	Outer membrane porin N	Null	b1377
mppA	ynaH	murein tripeptide (L-ala-gamma-D-glutamyl-meso-DAP) transporter subunit	Transport; Not classified	Murein tripeptide-, heme-binding protein, periplasmic; L-ala-gamma-D-glutamyl-meso-DAP binding protein; feeds into the Dpp (heme) and Opp (murein peptide) transport systems	PgrR(YjcZ) is a global regulator involved in murein peptide degradation specifically acting as a transcriptional repressor for the downstream mppA gene and for the divergent ycjY-ymjD'-ymjC'-mpaA defective operon; PgrR is proposed to be involved in the switch decision to recycle or degrade murein peptides; additional genes at distal loci are also regulated by PgrR (Shimada, 2013). E. coli does not normally use exogeneous heme, but heme can be utilized if a foreign OM heme receptor is expressed in E. coli; heme and tripeptides compete for the same binding site; DppA is an alternative heme periplasmic binding protein; MppA or DppA is required for the uptake of 5-aminolevulinic acid (Letoffe, 2006).	b1329
mtfA	yeeI	anti-repressor for DgsA(Mlc)	Null	Mlc anti-repressor; binds Mlc and blocks its repression of ptsG; cytoplasmic	An mtfA mutation has elevated ptsG activity; overproduction increases pstG and mlc expression. The alternate start codon used here is supported in that the 265 aa protein is sufficient for activity (Becker, 2006) and is likely to be used as the in vivo start codon. OtherPDB (K. pneumoniae): 3DL1,3KHI.	b1976
yeeJ	None	putative adhesin	Putative factor; Not classified	Overexpression increases adhesion and biofilm formation; probable adhesin, function unknown; intimin/invasin homolog	YeeJ contains 13 Big-1 (Bacterial Ig-like) repeat domains from residues 739-2053.	b1978
yeeL'	yeeK	pseudogene, glycosyltransferase homology	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction, glycosyltransferase family	An intact YeeL is found in E. coli O157:H7 Z3137. Stop codon 235 is translated as an X in the reconstructed protein sequence. Intact alleles in other E. coli strains, e. g. O157:H7 Z3137, have a Gln codon at this position. Intact YeeL may be involved in the heptosylation of the adjacent adhesin homolog YeeJ, analogous to Aah of E. coli O126:H27.	b4497
ykgA'	None	pseudogene, AraC family	Putative regulator; Not classified	Pseudogene, N-terminal fragment, AraC family; interrupted/deleted by IS3A	Full length 296 aa YkgA protein from E. coli O157:H7 is Z0376.	b0300
yeeN	None	UPF0082 family protein	Null	UPF0082 family protein, function unknown	YeeN deletion confers cold-sensitive growth, Dassain(1999). YeeN and YebC are paralogs. UPF0082. HT_Cmplx39_Cyt: YeeN+YeeZ.	b1983
yeeO	None	putative multdrug exporter, MATE family	Null	Predicted multdrug exporter, MATE family, function unknown	Multi Antimicrobial Extrusion (MATE) family member, PF01554 and IPR002528.	b1985
yeeP'	None	pseudogene, CP4-44 prophage; 50S ribosome-binding GTPase family	Phage or Prophage Related	Pseudogene, CP4-44 putative defective prophage; 50S ribosome-binding GTPase family	The full length 290 aa YeeP protein from E. coli O157:H7 is Z1650, which is omologous to ykfA and yfjP.	b1999
yeeR	None	CP4-44 prophage; putative membrane protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Function unknown, CP4-44 putative defective prophage	Null	b2001
yeeS	None	CP4-44 prophage; putative DNA repair protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Function unknown, CP4-44 putative defective prophage	Null	b2002
yeeT	None	CP4-44 prophage; uncharacterized protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Function unknown, CP4-44 putative defective prophage	Null	b2003
cbeA	yeeU	CP4-44 prophage; cytoskeleton bundling-enhancing factor A; CbtA antitoxin	Phage or Prophage Related	Cytoskeleton bundling-enhancing factor A, CbtA antitoxin; CP4-44 putative defective prophage	Unlike other antitoxins, CbeA(YeeU) does not act by binding to the CbtA toxin, but by stabilizing the CbtA cytoskeletal protein targets MreB and FtsZ by enhancing their polymeric bundling; CbeA also antagonizes the effects of other cytoskeletal disrupting agents such as A22, SulA and MinC (Masuda, 2012). The crystal structure of CbeA(YeeU) has been solved (2H28) and the CbeA(YeeU) antitoxin is structurally related to the RelE and YoeB toxins (Arbing, 2010).	b2004
cbtA	yeeV	CP4-44 prophage; toxin of the YeeV-YeeU toxin-antitoxin system	Phage or Prophage Related	Cytoskeleton binding toxin; toxin component of toxin-antitoxin protein pair CbtA-CbeA; CP4-44 putative defective prophage	CbtA binds to and inhibits the polymerization of cytoskeletal proteins FtsZ and MreB; CbtA inhibits the GTPase activity of FtsZ (Tan, 2011). ykfI, ypjF and cbtA(yeeV) are paralogs. Overexpression of CbtA(YeeV) inhibits growth (Brown, 2003).	b2005
yeeW'	None	CP4-44 prophage; uncharacterized protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Pseudogene, CP4-44 putative defective prophage	Null	b2006
yeeX	None	UPF0265 family protein	Phenotype; Not classified	UPF0265 family proetin	Null	b2007
yeeY	None	LysR family putative transcriptional regulator	Putative regulator; Not classified	Putative LysR family transcriptional regulator	Null	b2015
yeeZ	None	putative epimerase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Predicted enzyme with a nucleoside diphosphate sugar substrate; predicted NAD(P) cofactor	The first 24 aa are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. HT_Cmplx39_Cyt: YeeN+YeeZ. yeeZ may be down-regulated in hepA(rapA) mutants (Lynch, 2007).	b2016
yfhM	None	bacterial alpha2-macroglobulin colonization factor ECAM; anti-host protease defense factor; periplasmic inner membrane-anchored lipoprotein	Null	Bacterial alpha2-macroglobulin colonization factor ECAM; anti-host proteinase defense factor; periplasmic inner membrane-anchored lipoprotein	Bacterial alpha2-macroglobulins, including YfhM, appear to have been acquired by Gram-negative bacteria from their metazoan hosts; repair transpeptidase PbpC and YfhM are encoded in a di-cistronic operon and may function together as a periplasmic defense and repair system (Budd, 2004). YfhM has been detected as a membrane-bound homotrimer although an earlier report found N-terminal modifed soluble YfhM to be monomeric (Doan, 2008; Maddalo, 2011). In vitro, E. coli K-12 MG1655 YfhM binds, covalently links, and inhibits by sequestering equine neutrophil elastase (HNE), a serine proteinase probably encountered during saprophytically colonization of mammalian hosts by non-pathogenic E. coli strains; the YfhM-HNE complex splits into 103 kDa (YfhM'-HNE) and 79 kDa (YfhM') fragments (Doan, 2008). Analagous to human alpha2-macroglobulin, YfhM(ECAM) has an intact stable beta-cysteinyl-gamma-glutamyl thiol ester at CxEQ within the conserved bacterial motif PYGCxEQtxS (residues 1184-1193) involved in covalent inactivation of attacking proteases (Budd, 2004; Doan, 2008). The first 17 aa of YfhM are predicted to be a type II signal peptide.	b2520
iscU	hsm-5, miaC(S.t.), nifU, yfhN	iron-sulfur cluster assembly scaffold protein	Null	Iron-sulfur cluster assembly scaffold protein	IscU fails to assemble Fe-S clusters in the presence of sodium citrate due to restricted free iron availability, however Fe-S cluster formation is restored, with sodium citrate present, in the presence of IscA. IscU and IscS form a complex (Agar, 2000; Tokumoto, 2002; Kato, 2002; Prischi, 2010). The IscU-IscS complex is stabilized by a covalent disifide bond between Cys328 of IscS and Cys63 of IscU (Kato, 2002). IscU has been classified as a "complex-orphan" protein that is largely unstructured unless bound to a partner, i.e. IscS (Prischi, 2010).	b2529
hycI	None	protease involved in processing C-terminal end of HycE	Enzyme; Degradation of proteins, peptides, glyco	Maturation endoprotease for Hydrogenase 3 large subunit HycE	FhlA regulon. Processing by HycI requires HycE Ni incorporation. Hydrogenase 3 is part of the formate hydrogenlyase complex.	b2717
iscR	yfhP	isc operon transcriptional repressor; suf operon transcriptional activator; oxidative stress- and iron starvation-inducible; autorepressor	Regulation of Fe-S cluster assembly genes	isc operon transcriptional repressor; suf operon transcriptional activator; icsR regulon regulator; oxidative stress- and iron starvation-inducible; autorepressor; contains Fe-S cluster	IscR is also a transcriptional repressor for rnlA (Otsuka, 2010).	b2531
ylbE	None	NO-induced DUF1116 protein	Null	NO-induced DUF1116 family protein, function unknown	An apparent frameshift mutation at codon 85 was a DNA sequencing error in U00096.2 that has now been corrected in version U00096.3 (Freddolino, 2012; K.E. Rudd and G. Plunkett III, unpublished). ylbE has been shown to be NO-induced and ylbE mutants are reported to be slightly NO sensitive (Justino, 2005); YahG has a 50 aa N-terminal domain not found in YlbE.	b4572
fdrA	ylbD	putative NAD(P)-binding acyl-CoA synthetase	Transport; Protein, peptide secretion	Multicopy suppressor of dominant negative ftsH mutations	Overexpression causes a decrease in the amount of biofilm formed and reduces motility.	b0518
yecM	yecL	putative metal-binding enzyme	Null	Function unknown, low abundance protein; structure suggests YecM is a metal-dependent enzyme	Null	b1875
wzzB	cld, rol, wzz	regulator of length of O-antigen component of lipopolysaccharide chains	Regulator; Outer membrane constituents	Regulator of lipopolysaccharide O-chain length; gene studied in Salmonella and non-K-12 strains	Null	b2027
ugd	pagA(S.t.), pmrE(S.t.), udg, yefA	UDP-glucose 6-dehydrogenase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Sugar-nucleotide biosynthesis, conversions	UDP-glucose 6-dehydrogenase	Salmonella Ugd ortholog is pmrA(basR)-regulated, phoP-regulated, and required for polymyxin resistance and growth in low Mg on solid media.	b2028
slyA	None	global transcriptional regulator	Regulator; Adaptations, atypical conditions	Activates crytpic hemolysin gene hlyE; global transcriptional regulator	The slyA-ydhIJK divergent promoter region binds FNR (Federowicz, 2014).	b1642
slyB	None	outer membrane lipoprotein	Putative membrane; Not classified	Novel verified lipoprotein, function unknown	SlyB has been detected as a high MW membrane-bound homo-oligomer with 20 subunits (Maddalo, 2011). Mg(2+) stimulon. The anmK-slyB divergent promoter region binds FNR (Federowicz, 2014). PhoPQ regulon. EvgAS-PhoPQ cascade enhanced-expression subset. The first 17 aa of SlyB are a type II signal peptide.	b1641
csgD	agfD(S.t.)	csgBAC operon transcriptional regulator	Putative regulator; Not classified	Transcriptional activator for csgBA and other genes	Hfq-dependent omrA and omrB sRNAs downregulate curli gene activator CsgD post-transcriptionally and repress curli formation (Holmqvist, 2010). CsgD (AgfD) has also been characterized in Salmonella. CsgD increases expression of glyA. csgD insertions eliminate RpoS-dependent transcription from the csgBA promoter. Cytoplasmic membrane-associated.	b1040
csgE	agfE(S.t.)	curlin secretion specificity factor	Structural component; Surface structures	Curlin secretion specificity factor; blocks CsgA amyloid formation; CsgEFG curlin secretion complex	CsgG alone can form outer membrane pores when over-expressed that lack specificity and directionality, leaking out small periplasmic proteins and making cells sensitive (permeable) to external erythromycin; co-expresssion of CsgE with CsgG produces curlin-specific export channels that require a 22 amino acid OM secretion signal from CsgA or, presuambly, CsgB for secretion; CsgE binds to and prevents the premature subunit assembly of curlin CsgA into amyloid fibers (Neninger, 2011). Periplasmic protein with predicted 22 aa signal.	b1039
csgF	agfF(S.t.)	curli nucleation outer membrane protein	Structural component; Surface structures	OM protein required for curli nucleation by CsgB; CsgEFG curlin secretion complex	CsgF is a surface-exposed lipoprotein component of the CsgEFG OM secretion complex required for CsgB-mediated nucleation of the assembly of the curlin CsgA into curli; a csgF mutant secretes CsgA away from the cell (Chapman, 2002; Robinson, 2006; Nenninger, 2009). Overexpression of csgF causes abnormal biofilm architecture. The predicted 19 aa signal peptide of CsgF is consistent with an observed secB-dependent precursor cleavage that is blocked by azide (Marani, 2006).	b1038
csgG	agfG(S.t.)	curli production assembly/transport outer membrane lipoprotein	Structural component; Surface structures	Pore-forming OM lipoprotein for curli subunit secretion; CsgEFG curlin secretion complex	CsgG is the pore-forming subunit of the CsgEFG outer membrane secretion complex for exporting CsgA and CsgB; the first 20 amino acids of the mature CsgA curlin (residues 21-40) are sufficient to target heterologous proteins the the CsgEFG secretion complex (Robinson, 2006). CsgG alone can form outer membrane pores when over-expressed that lack specificity and directionality, leaking out small periplasmic proteins and making cells sensitive (permeable) to external erythromycin; co-expresssion of CsgE with CsgG produces curlin-specific export channels that require a 22 amino acid OM secretion signal from CsgA or, presuambly, CsgB for secretion; CsgE binds to and prevents the premature subunit assembly of curlin CsgA into amyloid fibers (Neninger, 2011). Overexpression causes abnormal biofilm architecture. The first 15 aa of CsgG are a type II signal peptide.	b1037
csgC	agfC(S.t.), ycdE	curli assembly protein	Putative structure; Not classified	Curli assembly protein	The overexpressed Salmonella AfgC(CsgC) protein is localized in the periplasm and has the first 8 amino acids removed, however SignalP does not predict this signal (Gibson, 2007). SignalP analysis is consistent with CsgC having an uncleaved signal anchor which may be subsequently cleaved by an intramembrane or periplasmic protease. Alternatively, the csgC signal peptide may be a valid type I signal peptide that is anomalous and was not represented in the SignalP training set.	b1043
gmr	yciR	cyclic-di-GMP phosphodiesterase; csgD regulator; modulator of RNase II stability	Null	Cyclic-di-GMP phosphodiesterase; csgD regulator; modulates protein stability of RNase II; dual domain protein; defective cyclase domain	Gmr has an N-terminal PAS signaling domain, a defective diguanylate cyclase domain lacking the I-site (RxxD), then a C-terminal cyclic-di-GMP phosphodiesterase EAL domain. gmr is a non-essential gene. RpoS regulon (Weber, 2006). Gmr(YciR) has cyclic-di-GMP phosphodiesterase activity in vitro (Weber, 2006). YdaM/Gmr(YciR) constitute an RpoS-regulated c-di-GMP synthesis/degradation module inversely regulated by Hns and controlling the expression of curli genes (Weber, 2006).	b1285
hldE	gmhC, rfaE, waaE, yqiF	heptose 7-phosphate kinase and heptose 1-phosphate adenyltransferase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Heptose 7-P kinase/heptose 1-P adenyltransferase; LPS core prescursor synthesis: bifunctional enzyme involved in both D-glycero-D-manno-heptose-1-phosphate and ADP-D-glycero-D-manno-heptose synthesis	Null	b3052
ybfL'	None	pseudogene, DDE domain transposase family	Putative factor; Not classified	Pseudogene reconstruction, H repeat-associated protein; rhsC-linked,	Full length paralogs YhhI and YdcC are putative transposases.	b0705
csiE	csi-16	stationary phase inducible protein	Null	Stationary phase inducible protein; sigma S-dependent promoter	CsiE has two central PRD domains with histidine residues predicted to be phosphorylated by the sugar phosphotransferase system (PTS) in response to the availability of carbon source. The PRD domains of BglG phosphorylated by the sugar phosphotransferase system (PTS) in response to the availability of carbon source	b2535
sodC	None	superoxide dismutase, Cu, Zn, periplasmic	Enzyme; Detoxification	Superoxide dismutase, Cu, Zn, periplasmic; mutants are sensitive to exogenous hydrogen peroxide in early stationary phase	Although SodC is a Cu-containing protein, it was not deteced by Cu-MIRAGE probably because it is unstable in crude extracts and because it releases its metals easily (Battistoni, 1995; Benov, 1997; Sevcenco, 2009; Sevcenco, 2012). SodC is repressed anaerobically by FNR and is induced in stationary phase by RpoS (Gort, 1999). SodC has an Ig-like domain: pfam PF00080 aligns to residues 33-172.	b1646
ydhF	None	putative oxidoreductase	Null	Predicted aldo/keto NAD(P) oxidoreductase, function unknown	A ydhF mutant has an elevated AMP level (Montero, 2009).	b1647
gloA	None	glyoxalase I, Ni-dependent	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	Glyoxalase I, lactoylglutathione lyase, Ni(2+) cofactor; inactivated by zinc; dimeric	gloA is part of the nemRA-gloA operon involved in electrophile detoxification; GloA reduces and detoxifies glyoxals (Lee, 2013).	b1651
feaR	maoB, maoR, maoX, ydbM	transcriptional activator for tynA and feaB	Regulator; Not classified	Transcriptional activator for tynA and feaB, AraC family	Null	b1384
ybjD	None	putative OLD family ATP-dependent endonuclease; DUF2813 family protein	Null	Putative OLD family ATP-dependent endonuclease; DUF2813 family protein	YbjD has an N-terminal AAA P-loop ATPase domain and a C-terminal TOPRIM_OLD domain; both domains are united in COG3953, which predicts the OLD-like ATP-dependent endonuclease function. The aqpZ-ybjD divergent operon promoter region binds FNR (Federowicz, 2014).	b0876
ybjE	None	putative transporter	Putative structure; Not classified	Function unknown	Null	b0874
rlmC	rumB, ybjF	23S rRNA m(5)U747 methyltransferase, SAM-dependent	Enzyme; rRNA modification	23S rRNA m(5)U747 methyltransferase, SAM-dependent	2/19 RlmC(RumB,YbjF) peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is not removed (Maillet, 2007).	b0859
ompG	None	outer membrane porin G	Membrane; Outer membrane constituents	Outer membrane porin G; induced by AI-2 pheromone	Null	b1319
flxA	None	Qin prophage; uncharacterized protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Member of FliA regulon, function unknown, Qin prophage	Null	b1566
ycfL	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Probable lipoprotein, function unknown; Cys conserved	First 18 aa are predicted to be a type II signal peptide.	b1104
lpoB	ycfM	OM lipoprotein stimulator of MrcB transpeptidase	Null	OM lipoprotein stimulator of MrcB transpeptidase	LpoB binds to and stimulates PBP1B (MrcB) to synthesize more peptidoglycan (murein) (Paradis-Bleau, 2010; Typas, 2010; Young, 2010). The PDB 4Q6Z structure the LpoB C-terminal domain is derived from E. coli UT189 but is 100% identical to K-12 LpoB (King, 2014). The LpoB-PBP1B complex may contribute to OM constriction during cell division (Typas, 2010). The first 19 aa of LpoB are a type II signal peptide. The TTG at codon -1 or the ATG at codon +4 could be the true start codon. 	b1105
thiK	ycfN	thiamine kinase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Thiamine	Thiamine kinase involved in thiamine salvage	Null	b1106
nagZ	ycfO	beta N-acetyl-glucosaminidase	Null	Beta-N-acetylglucosaminidase	Null	b1107
ycfP	None	putative UPF0227 family esterase	Null	Predicted UPF0227 family esterase, function unknown	ycfP and yqiA are paralogs. 3/30 YcfP peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is not removed (Maillet, 2007).	b1108
ycfQ	None	repressor for bhsA(ycfR)	Regulator; Not classified	Repressor for bhsA(ycfR)	YcfQ was characterized as a repressor for bhsA(ycfR) in E. coli O157:H7 (Deng, 2011). YcfQ belongs to the TetR family of transcriptional repressors.	b1111
bhsA	ycfR	biofilm, cell surface and signaling protein	Null	Peroxide and cadmium resistance periplasmic protein; biofilm and cell surface modulator; DUF1471 family protein	The complex bhsA mutant phenotype includes sensitivity to acid, heat, hydrogen peroxide, and cadmium, as well as 5-fold increased biofilm in the presence of glucose, increased cell surface hydrophobicity, and increased aggregation; the mutant phenotype of enhanced biofilm formation upon stress is suppressed by exogenous indole or by a tnaA mutation (Zhang, 2007). Induced during biofilm formation. Crp regulon. Probable periplasmic protein. The first 22 aa of BhsA are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b1112
ldtC	ycfS	L,D-transpeptidase linking Lpp to murein	Enzyme; Murein sacculus, peptidoglycan	L,D-transpeptidase linking Lpp to murein, periplasmic	The first 28 aa of LdtC are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b1113
ycfT	None	inner membrane protein	Null	Inner membrane protein, function unknown	Null	b1115
lolC	ycfU	lipoprotein-releasing system transmembrane protein	Null	LolA-dependent release of lipoproteins from inner membrane; essential gene	Null	b1116
lolD	ycfV	outer membrane-specific lipoprotein transporter subunit	Putative transport; Not classified	LolA-dependent release of lipoproteins from inner membrane; essential gene	Null	b1117
lolE	ycfW	lipoprotein-releasing system transmembrane protein	Putative enzyme; Not classified	LolA-dependent release of lipoproteins from inner membrane; essential gene	Null	b1118
nagK	ycfX	N-acetyl-D-glucosamine kinase	Null	N-acetyl-D-glucosamine kinase; phosphorylates GlcNAc in the cytoplasm	nagK is not an essential gene. NagK has low level glucokinase activity.	b1119
cobB	npdA, ycfY	deacetylase of acs and cheY, chemotaxis regulator	Null	Protein lysine deacetylase, NAD(+)-dependent; chemotaxis regulator; protein lysine desuccinylase; sirituin homolog	In addition to its activity as a protein lysine deacetylase, CobB has protein lysine desuccinylase activity (Colak, 2013). NhoA is acetylated at Lys214 and at the C-terminal Lys281; NhoA is deacetylated by CobB, acetylation and deacytylation affects NhoA activity (Zhang, 2013). RcsB is acetylated at Lys180 by Pka(YfiQ) in vitro blocking its ability to bind to DNA, and Lys180 is deacetylated by CobB in vitro (Thao, 2010). Acetyl CoA synthase Acs is activated by CobB-mediated deacetylation of K609 in Salmonella (Starai, 2002). E. coli CobB deacetylates the Acs K609 peptide in vitro (Zhao, 2004). Protein acetyltransferase in Salmonella inhibits acetyl CoA synthase Acs by acetylating residue K609 (Starai, 2004). More than 100 proteins have acetylated lysines in E. coli (Yu, 2008; Zhang, 2008). CobB may have a limited role in general protein lysine deacetylation since only four protein bands were changed in an E. coli cobB mutant (Zhang, 2008). cobB is named after its Salmonella ortholog and has no known cobalamin function in E. coli. CobB can deacetylate CheY in vitro and in vivo, reducing FliM binding and chemotaxis (Li, 2010). cobB is a mutational phenotypic suppressor of a cheA cheZ double mutation (Li, 2010). CobB has been reported to have a weak protein ADP-ribosyltransferase activity, although this was subsequently refuted (Frye, 1999; Landry, 2000). CobB can catalyze an NAD-nicotinamide exchange reaction, which is dependent on the presence of acetyllysine, alone or in proteins, indicative of formation of an enzyme-ADP-ribose intermediate during the NAD-dependent deacetylation reaction (Landry, 2000). The CobB start has been moved up to Met-38, removing 37 aa that are not conserved, however verification is required because the upstream start has a good RBS and might be utilized in E. coli if transcribed (Maillet, 2007).	b1120
ycfZ	None	inner membrane protein	Putative factor; Not classified	Inner membrane protein, function unknown	Null	b1121
ymfA	None	DUF3592 family inner membrane protein	Null	Required for swarming phenotype, inner membrane protein, function unknown	Null	b1122
nudJ	ymfB	bifunctional thiamine pyrimidine pyrophosphate hydrolase and thiamine pyrophosphate hydrolase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Thiamine pyrophosphate (TPP) phosphatase; non-specific nucleoside tri-and diphosphatase; bacimethrin resistance	NudJ also catalyzes hydrolysis of 4-amino-2-methyl-5-hydroxymethylpyrimidine pyrophosphate, MeO-HMP-PP, CF3-HMP-PP and MeO-TPP.	b1134
rluE	ymfC	23S rRNA pseudouridine(2457) synthase	Enzyme; rRNA modification	23S rRNA pseudouridine(2457) synthase	Null	b1135
ymfD	None	e14 prophage; putative SAM-dependent methyltransferase	Phage or Prophage Related	Predicted SAM-dependent methyltransferase, function unknown; e14 prophage	Null	b1137
ymfE	None	e14 prophage; putative inner membrane protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Predicted membrane protein, function unknown, e14 prophage	Null	b1138
caiF	None	cai operon transcriptional activator	Regulator; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	Transcriptional activator of cai operon	A 59 aa ORF yaaV (EG12706) was previously annotated upstream of caiF. yaaV has also been reported as a pseudogene, but the allelic variation, lack of homologs, rare codons, map position and poor RBS indicate it is not a gene and it has been removed.	b0034
trmJ	yfhQ	tRNA mC32,mU32 2'-O-methyltransferase, SAM-dependent	Enzyme; tRNA modification	tRNA mC32,mU32 2'-O-methyltransferase, SAM-dependent; low abundance protein	TrmJ modifies tRNA(Gln1) and tRNA(Gln2) at the U32 position and modifies tRNA(fMet1), tRNA(fMet2), tRNA(Ser1) and tRNA(Trp1) at the C32 position (Purta, 2006). 	b2532
yfhR	None	putative S9 family prolyl oligopeptidase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Predicted prolyl oligopeptidase	YfhR is a member of the S9 peptidase family of predicted prolyl oligopeptidases (PF00326).	b2534
hcaT	yfhS	putative 3-phenylpropionic transporter	Transport; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Probable 3-phenylpropionic acid/cinnamic acid transporter; hca genes catabolize 3-phenylpropionate and cinnamic acid, feeding the products into the the mhp pathway	Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS). Hydrocinnamic acid is a synonym for 3-phenylpropionic acid.	b2536
hcaR	phdR, yfhT	hca operon transcriptional regulator	Regulator; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Transcriptional activator for the hca operon; inducd by 3-phenylpropionate and cinnamic acid; autoregulatory	Hydrocinnamic acid is a synonym for 3-phenylpropionic acid. LysR family.	b2537
hcaE	digA, hcaA, hcaA1, phdC1, yfhU	3-phenylpropionate dioxygenase, large (alpha) subunit	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	3-Phenylpropionate/cinnamic acid dioxygenase, alpha subunit; hca genes catabolize 3-phenylpropionate and cinnamic acid, feeding the products into the the mhp pathway	Hydrocinnamic acid is a synonym for 3-phenylpropionic acid. The N-terminal domains of YeaW and HcaE are homologous.	b2538
hcaF	digB, hcaA, hcaA2, hcaB, phdC2, yfhV	3-phenylpropionate dioxygenase, small (beta) subunit	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	3-Phenylpropionate/cinnamic acid dioxygenase, beta subunit; hca genes catabolize 3-phenylpropionate and cinnamic acid, feeding the products into the the mhp pathway	Hydrocinnamic acid is a synonym for 3-phenylpropionic acid.	b2539
hcaC	hcaA3, phdB, yfhW	3-phenylpropionate dioxygenase, ferredoxin subunit	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	3-Phenylpropionate/cinnamic acid dioxygenase, ferredoxin subunit; hca genes catabolize 3-phenylpropionate and cinnamic acid, feeding the products into the the mhp pathway	Hydrocinnamic acid is a synonym for 3-phenylpropionic acid. HcaC is a Rieske [2Fe-2S] protein (Boxhammer, 2008).	b2540
hcaB	phdD, yfhX	2,3-dihydroxy-2,3-dihydrophenylpropionate dehydrogenase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	3-Phenylpropionate-dihydrodiol dehydrogenase; hca genes catabolize 3-phenylpropionate and cinnamic acid, feeding the products into the the mhp pathway	Hydrocinnamic acid is a synonym for 3-phenylpropionic acid. HcaB is also called 2,3-dihydroxy-2,3-dihydrophenylpropionate dehydrogenase. HcaB also likely has cinnamic acid-dihydrodiol dehydrogenase activity.	b2541
hcaD	hcaA4, phdA, yfhY	phenylpropionate dioxygenase, ferredoxin reductase subunit	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	3-Phenylpropionate/cinnamic acid dioxygenase, ferredoxin reductase subunit; hca genes catabolize 3-phenylpropionate and cinnamic acid, feeding the products into the the mhp pathway	Hydrocinnamic acid is a synonym for 3-phenylpropionic acid.	b2542
glrK	qseE, yfhK, yfhZ	sensor protein kinase regulating glmY sRNA in two-component system with response regulator GlrR	Putative regulator; Not classified	Sensor protein kinase regulating glmY sRNA; cognate response regulator is GlrR(QseF)	GlrK(QseE,YfhK) signals GlrR(QseF,YfhA) to bind the glmY promoter and activate a sigma-54 (RpoN) promoter that overlaps the sigma-70 (RpoD) promoter (Reichenbach, 2009). Also characterized in an EPEC strain, QseC activates transcription of qseEGF(glrK-yfhG-glrR) in response to the autoinducer-3 (AI-3)/epinephrine/norepinephrine interkingdom signaling system (Reading, 2007). The sensor kinase QseE(GlrK) is responsive to epinephrine, sulfate and phosphate and transcription is activated by AI-3/epinephrine/norepinephrine via QseC in EPEC (Reading, 2007). GlrK(QseE,YfhK) phosphorylates GlrR(QseF,YfhA) and has autokinase activity in vitro (Yamamoto, 2005). QseEF also responds directly to epinephrine, sulfate and phosphate in EPEC (Reading, 2009).	b2556
yphA	None	DoxX family inner membrane protein	Null	DoxX family inner membrane protein, function unknown; membrane oxidoreductase subunit homolog	YphA and YqjF are paralogs. YphA has a DoxX/SURF4 domain (Pfam PF07681). Predicted yphFEDCB operon.	b2543
yphB	None	mutarotase superfamily protein, YphB family	Null	Mutarotase superfamily protein, YphB family, function unknown	YphB is the prototypical member of the YphB family (NCBI CDD cd09021) of the mutarotase superfamily (NCBI CDD cd01081; Pfam PF01263) that is predicted to catalyze the epimerization of an unknown sugar or phosphosugar substrate(s).	b2544
yphC	None	putative Zn-dependent NAD(P)-binding oxidoreductase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Function unknown, alcohol dehydrogenase homolog	Predicted yphFEDCB operon.	b2545
yphD	None	putative sugar ABC transporter permease	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative sugar ABC transporter permease	Predicted yphFEDCB operon. Putative YphDEF ABC transport system.	b2546
yphE	None	putative sugar ABC transporter ATPase	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative sugar ABC transporter ATPase	Predicted yphFEDCB operon. Putative YphDEF ABC transport system.	b2547
yphF	None	putative sugar ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein	Putative regulator; Not classified	Putative sugar ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein	Predicted yphFEDCB operon. Putative YphDEF ABC transport system.	b2548
yphG	None	DUF4380 domain-containing TPR repeat protein	Null	DUF4380 domain-containing TPR repeat protein; function unknown	YphG has an N-terminal DUF4380 domain; residues 499-602 and 745-810 are comprised of TPR family repeats.	b2549
yphH	None	putative DNA-binding transcriptional regulator	Putative regulator; Not classified	Function unknown	Null	b2550
ybiY	pflE	putative pyruvate formate lyase activating enzyme	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Pyruvate formate-lyase activase homolog, function unknown	The fsa-ybiYW divergent operon promoter region binds FNR and ArcA (Federowicz, 2014). Radical SAM superfamily.	b0824
fsaA	mipB, ybiZ	fructose-6-phosphate aldolase 1	Null	Fructose-6-phosphate aldolase A	The fsa-ybiYW divergent operon promoter region binds FNR and ArcA and fsa expression is activated by ArcA (Federowicz, 2014). A small portion of the FsaA sample for N-terminal Edman protein sequencing had the initial fMet cleaved, but this loss may have occurred during sample preparation since the intact protein has a molecular mass of 22.998 daltons, consitent with retention of the initial fMet residue (Schurmann, 2001).	b0825
gsiA	yliA	glutathione ABC transporter ATPase	Putative transport; Not classified	Glutathione ABC transporter ATPase	TTG start codon is predicted based on Salmonella comparison and the presence of a better RBS.	b0829
gsiB	yliB	glutathione ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein	Putative transport; Not classified	Glutathione ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein	Lipoprotein prediction is a probable false positive: C23 is not conserved (Gonnet, 2004). The first 26 are a type I signal peptide; the processed mature N-terminal fragment was identified by MS as 5/65 GsiB(YliB, b0830) peptides matching the processed N-terminus (Maillet, 2007).	b0830
gsiC	yliC	glutathione ABC transporter permease	Putative transport; Not classified	Glutathione ABC transporter permease	GsiC is a likely inner membrane protein.	b0831
gsiD	yliD	glutathione ABC transporter permease	Putative transport; Not classified	Glutathione ABC transporter permease	GsiD is a likely inner membrane protein.	b0832
yliE	None	putative membrane-anchored cyclic-di-GMP phosphodiesterase	Null	Membrane-anchored putative cyclic-di-GMP phosphodiesterase	YliE is membrane-anchored protein that appears to have an N-terminal periplasmic domain flanked by two predicted TM segments and has a C-terminal cytoplasmic EAL PDE domain (Daley, 2005). The periplasmic domain of YliE may be a YliE-specific periplasmic signaling domain or domain variant that does not match other known domain signatures. YliEF may constitute a cyclic-di-GMP synthesis/degradation module. A yliE rssB9(hnr) double null mutant has significantly increased lycopene production in 1X M9; the effect may be salt-suppressible as it is not seen in 2X M9 (Alper, 2008).	b0833
yliF	None	putative membrane-anchored diguanylate cyclase	Null	Membrane-anchored putative diguanylate cyclase	CsrA inhibits yliF translation (Jonas, 2008). YliF has an N-terminal predicted periplasmic domain flanked by two predicted TM segments and has a C-terminal cytoplasmic diguanylate cyclase GGDEF domain (Daley, 2005). The periplasmic domain of YliF may be a YliF-specific periplasmic signaling domain or domain variant that does not match other known domain signatures. YliF has a false positive lipoprotein prediction. YliEF may constitute a cyclic-di-GMP synthesis/degradation module.	b0834
rimO	yliG	ribosomal protein S12 methylthiotransferase	Null	Ribosomal protein S12 methylthiotransferase	rimO and miaB are paralogs. RimO catalyzes the methylthiolation of Asp-89 of ribosomal protein S12 to form 3-methylthioaspartic acid (Kowalak, 1996; Anton, 2008). YcaO is required for the efficient in vivo RimO-dependent beta-methylthiolation of ribosomal protein S12 (RpsL) on Asp-89 (Strader, 2011). Asp-88 of the mature RpsL is Asp-89 of the unmodified protein. The divergent rimO-bssR operon promoter region binds FNR and ArcA; rimO is activated by ArcA and FNR (Federowicz, 2014). RimO is a member of the radical SAM superfamily.	b0835
bssR	yliH	repressor of biofilm formation by indole transport regulation	Putative factor; Not classified	Repressor of biofilm formation by indole transport regulation; global regulator. e.g. of AI-2 transport and motility genes	BssR increases Mtr expression and indole import and decreases AcrEF expression and indole export. bssR is induced during biofilm formation. The divergent rimO-bssR operon promoter region binds ArcA and FNR; bssR is repressed by ArcA and activated by FNR (Federowicz, 2014).	b0836
yliI	None	soluble aldose sugar dehydrogenase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Soluble aldose sugar dehydrogenase; Asd; binds PQQ; outer membrane protein	The predicted 20 aa signal peptide of YliI is consistent with an observed secB-dependent precursor cleavage that is blocked by azide (Marani, 2006). RpoS regulon.	b0837
gstB	yliJ	glutathione S-transferase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Thioredoxin, glutaredoxin, glutathione	Glutathione transferase, iodoacetate-, bromoacetate-specific; natural substrate unknown	GstB(yliJ) is a glutathione-dependent bromoacetate dehalogenase (Desai, 2010).	b0838
ydjF	None	putative DNA-binding transcriptional regulator	Putative regulator; Not classified	Predicted transcriptional regulator, function unknown	DeoR family.	b1770
ydjG	None	methylglyoxal reductase, NADH-dependent	Null	Methylglyoxal reductase, NADH-dependent	YdjG is an NADH-specific methylglyoxal reductase, but a D232A or D232E mutant can also use NADPH (di Luccio, 2006).	b1771
ydjH	None	putative kinase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Putative sugar kinase, function unknown	Null	b1772
ydjI	None	putative aldolase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Putative sugar 1,6-bisphosphate aldolase, function unknown	kbaY, gatY, fbaA and ydjI are paralogs.	b1773
ydjJ	None	putative Zn-dependent NAD(P)-binding oxidoreductase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Putative alcohol dehydrogenase, function unknown; Zn-type	Null	b1774
ydjK	None	putative MFS sugar transporter, membrane protein	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative MFS transporter, function unknown; membrane protein	YdjK is a member of the Sugar Porter (SP) family within the Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS) of transporters.	b1775
ydjL	None	putative Zn-dependent NAD(P)-binding oxidoreductase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Putative alcohol dehydrogenase, function unknown; Zn-type	Null	b1776
yeaC	None	DUF1315 family protein	Null	DUF1315 family protein,function unknown	Null	b1777
spy	None	periplasmic ATP-independent protein refolding chaperone, stress-induced	Null	Periplasmic ATP-independent protein refolding chaperone; dimeric	Spy is an ATP-independent chaperone that suppresses protein aggregation and aids protein refolding in the periplasm (Quan, 2011). Spy is induced by zinc and envelope stress, dependent on both CpxR and BaeSR. Spy and CpxP are paralogs.	b1743
yeaE	None	aldo-keto reductase, methylglyoxal to acetol, NADPH-dependent	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Aldo-keto reductase, NADPH-dependent; methylglyoxal reductase; glyoxal resistance protein	YeaE has weak glyoxal reductase activity and weak glycolaldehyde reductase activity, but deletion of dkgA(yqhE) increases sensitivity to glyoxal, possibly because of the high Km for glyoxal (Lee, 2013).	b1781
mipA	yeaF	scaffolding protein for murein synthesizing machinery	Null	MltA-interacting protein; outer membrane; binds MrcB and MltA in a heterotrimer	MipA is a scaffolding protein for the bifunctional murein polymerase MrcB and the lytic transglycosylase MltA.	b1782
yeaG	None	protein kinase, endogenous substrate unidentified; autokinase	Null	Protein kinase, function unknown; autokinase	YeaG can phosphorylate a 65 kDa endogenous protein, but this protein has not been identified; yeaG mutants display a post-exponential growth defect (Tagourti et al., Ann. Microbiol. 61:499, 2011). Purified YeaG can autophosphorylate and can phosphorylate casein (Tagourti, 2008). YeaG is related to the B. subtilis serine protein kinase PrkA, COG2766 family. 26/477 peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is not removed (Maillet, 2007). YeaG is in the RpoS regulon and is salt and acid inducible (Weber, 2005).	b1783
yeaH	None	UPF0229 family protein	Null	UPF0229 family protein, function unknown	Null	b1784
yeaI	None	putative membrane-anchored diguanylate cyclase	Null	Predicted membrane-anchored inactive diguanylate cyclase	The GGDEF motif for YeaI is EGEVF and the putative diguanylate cyclase domain is likely to be non-functional (Sommerfeldt, 2009). YeaI has an N-terminal integral membrane domain with 8 predicted TM helices reminiscent of the MASE TM signaling domains found in other c-di-GMP domain proteins. The yeaI promoter region binds FNR (Federowicz, 2014).	b1785
yeaJ	None	putative diguanylate cyclase	Null	Predicted membrane-anchored diguanylate cyclase	A yeaJ null mutation partially suppresses the motility defect of a yhjH mutation at 37C; a yegE null mutation is a better yhjH suppressor at 28C; full yhjH suppression requires yegE, yedQ and yeaJ null mutations when grown at 37C (Pesavento, 2008). YeaJ has an N-terminal predicted periplasmic domain flanked by two TM segments and has a C-terminal cytoplasmic diguanylate cyclase GGDEF domain. Upregulated by GSNO in defined medium (aerobic).	b1786
yeaK	None	aminoacyl-tRNA editing domain protein	Null	Aminoacyl-tRNA editing domain protein, function unknown	YeaK is homologous to YbaK and an editing domain in ProS, and YeaK may deacylate mischarged tRNA (Ahel, 2003).	b1787
yeaL	None	UPF0756 family putative inner membrane protein	Null	Predicted inner membrane protein, UPF0756 family, function unknown	Null	b1789
yeaM	None	putative DNA-binding transcriptional regulator	Putative regulator; Not classified	AraC family transcriptional activator, function unknown	Null	b1790
yeaN	None	putative MFS transporter, inner membrane protein	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative MFS transporter, function unknown; inner membrane protein	YeaN is a member of the Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS) of transporters.	b1791
yeaO	None	DUF488 family protein	Null	DUF488 family protein, function unknown	Null	b1792
yeaP	None	diguanylate cyclase	Null	Diguanylate cyclase	YeaP has diguanylate cyclase activity in vitro (Ryjenkov, 2005). YeaP has an N-terminal GAF domain and a C-terminal diguanylate cyclase GGDEF domain.	b1794
yeaQ	None	UPF0410 family protein	Null	UPF0410 family protein, function unknown	Null	b1795
yeaR	None	DUF1971 family protein, nitrate-inducible	Null	Nitrate-induced protein, DUF1971 family; function unknown; involved in cadmium and peroxide resistance	A yeaR mutant strain is sensitive to hydrogen peroxide and cadmium (Lee, 2009). The yeaR-yoaG operon is nitrate-regulated and in the NarL and NsrR regulons (Hsia-Yin, 2007). YeaR may associate with the single-domain TehB and be involved in tellurite resistance since it is homologous to the N-terminal domain of two-domain TehB proteins, but this prediction has not been tested.	b1797
leuE	yeaS	leucine efflux protein	Null	Leucine efflux protein; overexpression causes leucine excretion; confers resistance to a number of amino acids and analogs, including glycyl-l-leucine, norleucine, threonine, homoserine lactone, alpha-aminobutyric acid, histidine, and homoserine	Lrp regulon, leucine-induced. Also induced by alpha-aminobutyric acid, threonine, methionine, lysine, histidine, alanine, and homoserine. LysE, RhtB transporter family.	b1798
dmlR	yeaT	transcriptional activator of dmlA	Regulator; Not classified	Transcriptional activator for dmlA, autorepressor	LysR family. DmlR(YeaT) does not regulate the downstream leuE gene. Mutations in dmlR(yeaU) or dmlA(yeaU) block growth on D-malate (Reed, 2006; Lukas, 2010).	b1799
dmlA	yeaU	D-malate oxidase, NAD-dependent; putative tartrate dehydrogenase	Enzyme; Not classified	D-malate oxidase, NAD(+)-dependent	DmlA(YeaU) is 77% identical to a characterized tartrate dehydrogenase from Pseudomonas putida (SP:Q51945); this P. putida enzyme also has D-malate oxidase activity (Karsten, 2002). The D-malate oxidase activity of YeaU has been confirmed (Reed, 2006), but the probable tartrate dehydrogenase activity has not been tested. Mutations in yeaT or yeaU block growth on D-malate (Reed, 2006). After four hours of Zn(II) stress, protein levels increased (Easton, 2006).	b1800
yeaV	None	putative transporter	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative transporter, function unknown	Betaine/Carnitine/Choline Transporter (BCCT) family. YeaV may import an exogenous substrate for YeaWX.	b1801
yeaW	None	putative YeaWX dioxygenase alpha subunit; 2Fe-2S cluster	Null	Predicted YeaWX dioxygenase alpha subunit, 2Fe-2S cluster	YeaW is a Rieske [2Fe-2S] cluster protein (Boxhammer, 2008). HcaE family. YeaWX is predicted to be an aromatic ring-hydroxylating dioxygenase.	b1802
yeaX	None	putative YeaWX dioxygenase beta subunit, reductase component	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Predicted YeaWX dioxygenase beta subunit, reductase component; function unknown	YeaX may reduce the YeaW [2Fe-2S] cluster. YeaX has a C-terminal 2Fe-2S ferredoxin-type domain. yeaX, hcr and paaE are paralogs. YeaWX is predicted to be an aromatic ring-hydroxylating dioxygenase.	b1803
yeaY	None	Slp family lipoprotein, RpoE-regulated	Membrane; Not classified	RpoE-regulated Slp family lipoprotein, function unknown	yeaY is a slp paralog. The first 22 aa of YeaY are a type II signal peptide.	b1806
tsaB	rpf(S.t.), yeaZ	tRNA(ANN) t(6)A37 threonylcarbamoyladenosine modification protein; binding partner and protease for TsaD	Enzyme; tRNA modification	tRNA(NNU) t(6)A37 threonylcarbamoyladenosine modification; binding partner and protease for TsaD	The modified tRNA nucleotide t(6)A37 is derived from the labile cyclized ct(6)A37 during extraction; the tRNA threonylcarbamoyladenosine dehydratase TcdA catalyzes the cyclization reaction (Miyauchi, 2013). TsaBCDE are necessary and sufficient for tRNA(NNU) t(6)A37 threonylcarbamoyladenosine modification in vitro (Deutsch, 2012). TsaB(YeaZ) is required for the essential function of TsaD(YjgD) (El Yacoubi, 2011). TsaB(YeaZ) interacts with TsaE(YjeE) and TsaD(YgjD), preferring TsaD(YgjD); TsaB(YeaZ) can proteolyze TsaD(YgjD) in vitro (Handford, 2009). Depletion of TsaB(YeaZ) causes highly condensed nuceoids; the TsaB(YeaZ) depletion phenotype is suppressed by multicopy clones of rstA (Handford, 2009). The N-terminal domain of TsaB(YeaZ)is homologous to TsaD(YgjD). TsaB(YeaZ) does not have glycoprotease activity against glycophorin A (Handford, 2009). Salmonella TsaB(YeaZ) does not have glycoprotease activity and lacks a critical zinc binding motif (Nichols, 2009). Salmonella TsaB(YeaZ) has been identified as the first Gram-negative bacterial RPF (Resuscitation-Promoting Factor) capable of reviving VNC (viable but non-culturable) cells when added externally, but the million-fold lower activity as compared to Gram-positive bacterial RPFs may indicate a lack of physiological relevance (Panutdaporn, 2006).	b1807
yoaA	None	putative ATP-dependent helicase, DinG family	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Predicted ATP-dependent helicase, DinG family; function unknown	Null	b1808
yoaB	None	putative reactive intermediate deaminase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Putative reactive intermediate deaminase, UPF0076 family; reaction intermediate detoxification	The Salmonella PF01042 family member RidA(YjgF) is an enamine/imine deaminase required for the detoxification of reactive intermediates of the PLP-dependent threonine dehydratase IlvA, releasing ammonia in a water-based reaction indicative of the low water environment of the cell (Lambrecht, 2012). RidA(YjgF), RutC, TdcF, YoaB and YjgH are paralogs and members of a highly conserved RidA(YjgF) family (pfam:PF01042) with diverse mutant phenotypes; the family members form homotrimers, some binding 2-ketoglutarate or related compounds, and all are probably reactive intermediate deaminases. The rat homolog PSP (perchloric acid-soluble protein) has been reported to have endoribonuclease activity, Endoribonuclease L, against ss mRNA, inhibiting translation.	b1809
yoaC	None	DUF1889 family protein	Null	Conserved protein, DUF1889 family, function unknown	Null	b1810
yoaD	adrB(S.t.)	putative membrane-anchored cyclic-di-GMP phosphodiesterase, regulator of cellulose production	Null	Predicted membrane-anchored cyclic-di-GMP phosphodiesterase; regulation of cellulose production	A yoaD mutant has increased aggregation. Overexpressed Salmonella typhimurium YoaD(AdrB) (STM1827) counteracts cellulose biosynthesis and mediates cyclic-di-GMP degradation. YoaD has an N-terminal predicted periplasmic CSS domain (PF12792) flanked by two TM segments and has a C-terminal cytoplasmic EAL PDE domain. Activated by CsgD. YaiC/YoaD may be a c-di-GMP synthesis/degradation module regulated by CsgA involved in controlling cellulose biosynthesis (Brombacher, 2006).	b1815
yoaE	borG	putative membrane protein/conserved protein	Putative transport; Not classified	Function unknown	Null	b1816
ypjC'	ypjB	pseudogene	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction	Intact versions of YpjC are encoded in the E. coli O157:H7 (449 aa), O42 and S. sonnei genomes. The C-terminus of YpjC may be polymorphic: K-12 and S. sonnei are missing a single stop codon near the end of the gene, allowing readthrough to a double stop codon, adding 8 residues not found in O42 or O157:H7. Stop codon 161 is translated as X in the reconstruction.	b2650
ygaQ'	ygaR, yqaC, yqaD	uncharacterized protein	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction, has alpha-amylase-related domain; reported to be required for swarming phenotype	This is a hypothetical reconstruction of an E. coli K-12 pseudogene: three stop codons (111, 346, and 614) were marked with Xs to fuse 4 ORFs into YgaQ. The intact YgaQ can be found in E. coli O42 and S. flexneri 2a strains 2457T and 301; they have Trp codons at all three stop positions. E. coli O157:H7 has one in-frame stop in YgaQ. 	b4462
csiD	csi-12, gab, ygaT	carbon starvation protein	Null	Carbon starvation induced protein; tetrameric; 2-oxoglutarate Fe(II)-dependent oxygenase-like protein	csiD is the first gene in csiD-lhgO-gabDTP operon. csiD is a carbon starvation-inducible gene that is regulated by RpoS, cAMP-CRP, HN-S and Lrp (Marschal, 1998). The structure of CsiD(Gab) indicates that it is distantly related to 2-oxoglutarate (2-OG) Fe(II)-dependent oxygenases; both CsiD(Gab) and the 2-OG oxygenases belong to the Cupin (jelly-roll) protein clan (Pfam CL0029); gel filtration and structure indicates it is a tetramer; 2-OG is a substrate for GabT and thus CsiD(Gab) may be involved in GABA metabolism or regulation; an iron ion is coordinated by His160, His292 and Asp162; Arg305 is conserved bewteen CsiD(Gab) the 2-OG oxygenases in which it binds substrate carboxylate groups indicating that CsiD(Gab) is likely to also utilize a substrate with a carboxylate group (Chance, 2002).	b2659
ygaV	None	tributyltin-inducible repressor of ygaVP	Null	Tributyltin-inducible repressor of ygaVP, function unknown	The physiological role or natural inducer for ygaVP is unknown.	b2667
alaE	ygaW	alanine exporter, alanine-inducible, stress-responsive	Null	Alanine exporter, inducible; stress-responsive	The alaE(ygaW) LAX12 and deletion mutant alleles are both sensitive to Ala-Ala; an alaE(ygaW) deletion exports alanine more slowly in the presence of Ala-Ala; overexpressed AlaE(YgaW) complements the alanine export defect of an alaE mutant (Hori, 2011) The AlaE alanine exporter gives the first function to the DUF1144 family, which had not been predicted to be a transporter family.	b2670
ygaY'	ygaX	pseudogene, major facilitator transporter superfamily	Putative transport; Not classified	Pseudogene reconstruction, MFS family	A 7 bp deletion at codon 88 caused a frameshift and deleted 2 codons; the reconstructed sequence is presented. An intact version of YgaY is present in E. coli O157:H7 as Z3982. Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS).	b2681
ygaZ	None	putative L-valine exporter, norvaline resistance protein	Null	Probable L-valine exporter, norvaline resistance	ygaZH mutants are hypersensitive to norvaline; YgaZH overproduction confers norvaline resistance (Park, 2007). YgaZH are homologus to the branched chain amino acid two-component export permease BrnEF of Corynebacterium glutamicum (Kennerknecht, 2002).	b2682
yqaA	None	COG1238 family inner membrane protein	Null	COG1238 family inner membrane protein, required for swarming; function unknown	The E. coli K-12 DedA superfamily (SNARE associated Golgi protein/PF09335) has eight paralogs in two families, the COG0586 DedA/YghB family (including the DedA/YabI/YohD subfamily and the general envelope maintenance protein YghB/YqjA subfamily) and the YdjX family (including the COG0398 YdjX/YdjZ subfamily and the COG1238 YqaA subfamily) (Doerrler, 2013; K.E.R.).	b2689
yqaB	None	fructose-1-P and 6-phosphogluconate phosphatase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Fructose-1-P and 6-phosphogluconate phosphatase; physiological role unknown; HAD6	HAD superfamily. In vitro activities demonstrated by Kuznetsova et al. (2005, 2006). Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004).	b2690
ybdL	None	methionine aminotransferase, PLP-dependent	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Methionine aminotransferase, PLP-dependent	Upregulated by GSNO in defined medium (aerobic). Also an aminotransferase for histidine, and weakly, phenylalanine.	b0600
ybdM	None	Spo0J family protein, ParB-like nuclease domain	Null	Spo0J family protein, ParB-like nuclease domain	YbdM is a Spo0J family protein (NCBI COG1475) with a central Par-like nuclease domain (Pfam PF02195).	b0601
ybdN	None	PAPS reductase-like domain protein	Null	PAPS reductase-like domain protein, function unknown	YbdN is comprised of an N-terminal PAPS reductase domain (Pfam PF01507) and a C-terminal DUF3390 domain (Pfam PF11922). PP-loop domain superfamily.	b0602
ybdO	None	putative DNA-binding transcriptional regulator	Putative regulator; Not classified	Required for swarming phenotype, function unknown; probable LysR-family transcriptional regulator	Null	b0603
dsbG	ybdP	thiol:disulfide interchange protein, periplasmic	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	Thiol:disulfide interchange protein, periplasmic; molecular chaperone; multicopy resistance to DTT; mutants accumulate reduced proteins	A dsbG defect is corrected by DsbAB overexpression.	b0604
ybdR	None	uncharacterized zinc-type alcohol dehydrogenase-like protein	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Putative zinc-type alcohol dehydrogenase	Null	b0608
citT	ybdS	citrate/succinate antiporter; citrate carrier	Putative membrane; Not classified	Citrate/succinate antiporter; citrate carrier	CitT is an inner membrane protein with 12 TM regions that has been identified as a citate/succcinate antiporter faciltating citrate transport in vivo and in vitro, with additional substrates including C4-dicarboxylates and tricarboxylates (Pos, 1998). CitT is a member of the IT (Ion Transporter) superfamily (Prakash, 2003). CitT belongs to the ST(3) structural class based on hydropathy profile (Lolkema, 2003). The N-terminal periplasmic sensor domain of CitA functions as a high-affinity citrate receptor (Kaspar, 2002). E. coli cannot use citrate as a carbon and energy source for aerobic growth like Klebsiella does (Koser, 1924). Citrate can be catabolized during anaerobic growth in the presence of an oxidizable co-substrate such as glucose, lactose or glycerol; the co-substrate provides needed reducing power (Lütgens, 1980). Aerobic utilzation of citrate is blocked by low CitT transporter expression, which can be overcome using a plasmid-encoded transporter (Pos, 1998). In addition to inducing the cit operon and citAB, adding citrate to anaerobic cultures up-regulates the mdh gene needed to convert the oxoaloacetate prodcut to malate (Yamamoto, 2008). The cytoplasmic transmitter domain of autophosphorylated CitA transphosphorylates the CitB receiver domain, causing the CitB DNA-binding output HTH domain to bind to the citCDEFXGT-citAB divergent promoter region and activate transcription of both operons; the reduction of CitA Cys529 is essential for autophosphorylation, perhaps acting as an oxygen-sensing inhibition mechanism, restricting cit gene expression to the anaerobic growth conditions that enable citrate-glucose co-fermentation (Yamamoto, 2008; Yamamoto, 2009). In addition to its role in citrate utilization, CitAB(DpiBA) may be involved in beta-lactam antibiotic resistance; the citC-T and citAB(dpiBA) operons are induced by beta-lactam treatment and shifting an ftsI(ts) strain to the non-permissive temperature, in a citB(dpiA)-independent mechanism; both treatments also induce the lexA-, recA-dependent SOS response, dependent upon the citB(dpiA) induction, and lexA or recA mutants block the SOS-dependent antibiotic-induced induction of the cit genes; the antibiotic MICs are not affected by citA or citB mutations, viability of a citB(dpiA) mutant is reduced 10-fold as compared to wildtype cells after overnight antibiotic exposure in liquid cultures (Miller, 2004). Plasmid-based overexpression of CitB(DpiA) increases fosfomycin resistance (Hirakawa, 2003). Deletion of citAB(dpiBA) did not change the sensitivity to 240 antibiotics and other growth inhibitors; likewise growth was unaltered in 1000 other growth-based assays such as various carbon and nitrogen source utilizations; the anaerobic utilization of citrate was not tested (Zhou, 2003). In vivo overproduced CitAB(DpiBA) stimulates the citC promoter and represses the appY promoter (Ingmar, 1998). Among other functions, the global transcriptional regulator AppY stimulates expression of the anaerobically-induced energy metabolism operons hyaA-F and cbdABX-appA (Brøndsted, 1996; Atlung, 1996; Atlung, 1997). Overproduced CitA(DpiB) destabilizes pSC101 (and other) plasmid inheritance, hence the synonyms dpiAB, and induces the SOS repsonse, acting by CitB(DpiA) binding to the AT-rich plasmid ori region and the chromosomal origin, respectively; citAB(dpiBA) mutants have no effect on plasmid inheritance (Ingmer, 1998; Miller, 2003). The citA(criR) gene was identified as a transcriptional regulator of the ipa pathogenicity island in Shigella flexneri, but E. coli K-12 does not have the ipa genes (Qi, 1996; Walker, 2002). ChiX(RybC,MicM) regulates citAB(dpiBA) mRNA; citAB(dpiBA) mRNA may be a ChiX trap-mRNA (also called an RNA decoy) (Mandin, 2009).	b0612
citG	ybdT	2-(5''-triphosphoribosyl)-3'-dephosphocoenzyme-A synthase	Null	2-(5''-triphosphoribosyl)-3'-dephosphocoenzyme-A synthase	The N-terminal periplasmic sensor domain of CitA functions as a high-affinity citrate receptor (Kaspar, 2002). E. coli cannot use citrate as a carbon and energy source for aerobic growth like Klebsiella does (Koser, 1924). Citrate can be catabolized during anaerobic growth in the presence of an oxidizable co-substrate such as glucose, lactose or glycerol; the co-substrate provides needed reducing power (Lütgens, 1980). Aerobic utilization of citrate is blocked by low CitT transporter expression, which can be overcome using a plasmid-encoded transporter (Pos, 1998). In addition to inducing the cit operon and citAB, adding citrate to anaerobic cultures up-regulates the mdh gene needed to convert the oxoaloacetate product to malate (Yamamoto, 2008). The cytoplasmic transmitter domain of autophosphorylated CitA transphosphorylates the CitB receiver domain, causing the CitB DNA-binding output HTH domain to bind to the citCDEFXGT-citAB divergent promoter region and activate transcription of both operons; the reduction of CitA Cys529 is essential for autophosphorylation, perhaps acting as an oxygen-sensing inhibition mechanism restricting cit gene expression to the anaerobic growth conditions that enable citrate-glucose co-fermentation (Yamamoto, 2008; Yamamoto, 2009). CitAB(DpiBA) has been reported to be involved in beta-lactam antibiotic resistance; the citC-T and citAB(dpiBA) operons are induced by beta-lactam treatment and by shifting an ftsI(ts) strain to the non-permissive temperature, in a citB(dpiA)-independent mechanism; both treatments also induce the lexA-, recA-dependent SOS response, dependent upon the citB(dpiA) induction, and lexA or recA mutants block the SOS-dependent antibiotic-induced induction of the cit genes; the antibiotic MICs are not affected by citA or citB mutations; the plating efficiency of a citB(dpiA) mutant is reduced 10-fold as compared to wildtype cells after overnight antibiotic exposure in liquid cultures (Miller, 2004). Plasmid-based overexpression of CitB(DpiA) increases fosfomycin resistance, but has no effect on beta-lactam resistance (Hirakawa, 2003a; Hirakawa, 2003b).	b0613
citX	ybdU	apo-citrate lyase phosphoribosyl-dephospho-CoA transferase	Null	Apo-citrate lyase phosphoribosyl-dephospho-CoA transferase	Null	b0614
citF	ybdV	citrate lyase, citrate-ACP transferase (alpha) subunit	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	Citrate lyase alpha chain	The N-terminal periplasmic sensor domain of CitA functions as a high-affinity citrate receptor (Kaspar, 2002). E. coli cannot use citrate as a carbon and energy source for aerobic growth like Klebsiella does (Koser, 1924). Citrate can be catabolized during anaerobic growth in the presence of an oxidizable co-substrate such as glucose, lactose or glycerol; the co-substrate provides needed reducing power (Lütgens, 1980). Aerobic utilization of citrate is blocked by low CitT transporter expression, which can be overcome using a plasmid-encoded transporter (Pos, 1998). In addition to inducing the cit operon and citAB, adding citrate to anaerobic cultures up-regulates the mdh gene needed to convert the oxoaloacetate product to malate (Yamamoto, 2008). The cytoplasmic transmitter domain of autophosphorylated CitA transphosphorylates the CitB receiver domain, causing the CitB DNA-binding output HTH domain to bind to the citCDEFXGT-citAB divergent promoter region and activate transcription of both operons; the reduction of CitA Cys529 is essential for autophosphorylation, perhaps acting as an oxygen-sensing inhibition mechanism restricting cit gene expression to the anaerobic growth conditions that enable citrate-glucose co-fermentation (Yamamoto, 2008; Yamamoto, 2009). CitAB(DpiBA) has been reported to be involved in beta-lactam antibiotic resistance; the citC-T and citAB(dpiBA) operons are induced by beta-lactam treatment and by shifting an ftsI(ts) strain to the non-permissive temperature, in a citB(dpiA)-independent mechanism; both treatments also induce the lexA-, recA-dependent SOS response, dependent upon the citB(dpiA) induction, and lexA or recA mutants block the SOS-dependent antibiotic-induced induction of the cit genes; the antibiotic MICs are not affected by citA or citB mutations; the plating efficiency of a citB(dpiA) mutant is reduced 10-fold as compared to wildtype cells after overnight antibiotic exposure in liquid cultures (Miller, 2004). Plasmid-based overexpression of CitB(DpiA) increases fosfomycin resistance, but has no effect on beta-lactam resistance (Hirakawa, 2003a; Hirakawa, 2003b).	b0615
citE	ybdW	citrate lyase, citryl-ACP lyase (beta) subunit	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	Citrate lyase beta chain	The N-terminal periplasmic sensor domain of CitA functions as a high-affinity citrate receptor (Kaspar, 2002). E. coli cannot use citrate as a carbon and energy source for aerobic growth like Klebsiella does (Koser, 1924). Citrate can be catabolized during anaerobic growth in the presence of an oxidizable co-substrate such as glucose, lactose or glycerol; the co-substrate provides needed reducing power (Lütgens, 1980). Aerobic utilization of citrate is blocked by low CitT transporter expression, which can be overcome using a plasmid-encoded transporter (Pos, 1998). In addition to inducing the cit operon and citAB, adding citrate to anaerobic cultures up-regulates the mdh gene needed to convert the oxoaloacetate product to malate (Yamamoto, 2008). The cytoplasmic transmitter domain of autophosphorylated CitA transphosphorylates the CitB receiver domain, causing the CitB DNA-binding output HTH domain to bind to the citCDEFXGT-citAB divergent promoter region and activate transcription of both operons; the reduction of CitA Cys529 is essential for autophosphorylation, perhaps acting as an oxygen-sensing inhibition mechanism restricting cit gene expression to the anaerobic growth conditions that enable citrate-glucose co-fermentation (Yamamoto, 2008; Yamamoto, 2009). CitAB(DpiBA) has been reported to be involved in beta-lactam antibiotic resistance; the citC-T and citAB(dpiBA) operons are induced by beta-lactam treatment and by shifting an ftsI(ts) strain to the non-permissive temperature, in a citB(dpiA)-independent mechanism; both treatments also induce the lexA-, recA-dependent SOS response, dependent upon the citB(dpiA) induction, and lexA or recA mutants block the SOS-dependent antibiotic-induced induction of the cit genes; the antibiotic MICs are not affected by citA or citB mutations; the plating efficiency of a citB(dpiA) mutant is reduced 10-fold as compared to wildtype cells after overnight antibiotic exposure in liquid cultures (Miller, 2004). Plasmid-based overexpression of CitB(DpiA) increases fosfomycin resistance, but has no effect on beta-lactam resistance (Hirakawa, 2003a; Hirakawa, 2003b).	b0616
citD	ybdX	citrate lyase, acyl carrier (gamma) subunit	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	Citrate lyase acyl carrier protein	The N-terminal periplasmic sensor domain of CitA functions as a high-affinity citrate receptor (Kaspar, 2002). E. coli cannot use citrate as a carbon and energy source for aerobic growth like Klebsiella does (Koser, 1924). Citrate can be catabolized during anaerobic growth in the presence of an oxidizable co-substrate such as glucose, lactose or glycerol; the co-substrate provides needed reducing power (Lütgens, 1980). Aerobic utilization of citrate is blocked by low CitT transporter expression, which can be overcome using a plasmid-encoded transporter (Pos, 1998). In addition to inducing the cit operon and citAB, adding citrate to anaerobic cultures up-regulates the mdh gene needed to convert the oxoaloacetate product to malate (Yamamoto, 2008). The cytoplasmic transmitter domain of autophosphorylated CitA transphosphorylates the CitB receiver domain, causing the CitB DNA-binding output HTH domain to bind to the citCDEFXGT-citAB divergent promoter region and activate transcription of both operons; the reduction of CitA Cys529 is essential for autophosphorylation, perhaps acting as an oxygen-sensing inhibition mechanism restricting cit gene expression to the anaerobic growth conditions that enable citrate-glucose co-fermentation (Yamamoto, 2008; Yamamoto, 2009). CitAB(DpiBA) has been reported to be involved in beta-lactam antibiotic resistance; the citC-T and citAB(dpiBA) operons are induced by beta-lactam treatment and by shifting an ftsI(ts) strain to the non-permissive temperature, in a citB(dpiA)-independent mechanism; both treatments also induce the lexA-, recA-dependent SOS response, dependent upon the citB(dpiA) induction, and lexA or recA mutants block the SOS-dependent antibiotic-induced induction of the cit genes; the antibiotic MICs are not affected by citA or citB mutations; the plating efficiency of a citB(dpiA) mutant is reduced 10-fold as compared to wildtype cells after overnight antibiotic exposure in liquid cultures (Miller, 2004). Plasmid-based overexpression of CitB(DpiA) increases fosfomycin resistance, but has no effect on beta-lactam resistance (Hirakawa, 2003a; Hirakawa, 2003b).	b0617
citB	criR(S.f.), dpiA, mpdA	response regulator in two-component regulatory system with CitA	Regulator; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Response regulator for the citCDEFXGT operon; two-component system, with CitA; citrate-independent beta-lactam-induction	The N-terminal periplasmic sensor domain of CitA functions as a high-affinity citrate receptor (Kaspar, 2002). E. coli cannot use citrate as a carbon and energy source for aerobic growth like Klebsiella does (Koser, 1924). Citrate can be catabolized during anaerobic growth in the presence of an oxidizable co-substrate such as glucose, lactose or glycerol; the co-substrate provides needed reducing power (Lütgens, 1980). Aerobic utilization of citrate is blocked by low CitT transporter expression, which can be overcome using a plasmid-encoded transporter (Pos, 1998). In addition to inducing the cit operon and citAB, adding citrate to anaerobic cultures up-regulates the mdh gene needed to convert the oxoaloacetate product to malate (Yamamoto, 2008). The cytoplasmic transmitter domain of autophosphorylated CitA transphosphorylates the CitB receiver domain, causing the CitB DNA-binding output HTH domain to bind to the citCDEFXGT-citAB divergent promoter region and activate transcription of both operons; the reduction of CitA Cys529 is essential for autophosphorylation, perhaps acting as an oxygen-sensing inhibition mechanism restricting cit gene expression to the anaerobic growth conditions that enable citrate-glucose co-utilization (Yamamoto, 2008; Yamamoto, 2009). CitAB(DpiBA) has been reported to be involved in beta-lactam antibiotic resistance; the citC-T and citAB(dpiBA) operons are induced by beta-lactam treatment and by shifting an ftsI(ts) strain to the non-permissive temperature, in a citB(dpiA)-independent mechanism; both treatments also induce the lexA-, recA-dependent SOS response, dependent upon the citB(dpiA) induction, and lexA or recA mutants block the SOS-dependent antibiotic-induced induction of the cit genes; the antibiotic MICs are not affected by citA or citB mutations; the plating efficiency of a citB(dpiA) mutant is reduced 10-fold as compared to wildtype cells after overnight antibiotic exposure in liquid cultures (Miller, 2004). Plasmid-based overexpression of CitB(DpiA) increases fosfomycin resistance, but has no effect on beta-lactam resistance (Hirakawa, 2003a; Hirakawa, 2003b). Deletion of citAB(dpiBA) did not change the sensitivity to 240 antibiotics and other growth inhibitors; likewise phenotypes were unaltered in ~1000 other assays such as various carbon and nitrogen source utilizations; the anaerobic utilization of citrate was not tested (Zhou, 2003). In vivo overproduced CitAB(DpiBA) stimulates the citC promoter and represses the appY promoter (Ingmar, 1998). Among other functions, the global transcriptional regulator AppY stimulates expression of the anaerobically-induced energy metabolism operons hyaA-F and cbdABX-appA (Brøndsted, 1996; Atlung, 1996; Atlung, 1997). Overproduced CitA(DpiB) destabilizes pSC101 (and other) plasmid inheritance, hence the synonyms dpiAB, and induces the SOS repsonse, acting by CitB(DpiA) binding to the AT-rich plasmid ori region and the chromosomal origin, respectively; citAB(dpiBA) mutants have no effect on plasmid inheritance (Ingmer, 1998; Miller, 2003). The citA(criR) gene was identified as a transcriptional regulator of the ipa pathogenicity island in Shigella flexneri, but E. coli K-12 does not have the ipa genes (Qi, 1996; Walker, 2002). ChiX(RybC,MicM) regulates citAB(dpiBA) mRNA; citAB(dpiBA) mRNA may be a ChiX trap-mRNA (also called an RNA decoy) (Mandin, 2009).	b0620
dcuC	None	anaerobic C4-dicarboxylate transport	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	C4-dicarboxylate carrier, anaerobic; W3110 has an IS5 insertion	IT (Ion Transporter) superfamily (Prakash, 2003). ST(3) structural class based on hydropathy profile (Lolkema, 2003).	b0621
nemA	ydhN	chromate reductase, quinone reductase, FMN-linked; N-Ethylmaleimide reductase; old yellow enzyme	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	Chromate reductase, quinone reductase, FMN-linked; N-Ethylmaleimide reductase; old yellow enzyme	NemA is a chromate reductase (Robins, 2013). nemA is part of the nemRA-gloA operon involved in electrophile detoxification; NemA can reduce quinones and other electrophiles (Lee, 2013). NemA is the "old yellow enzyme" (OYE) of E. coli (Williams, 2002). nemR mutants suppress the putative malonic semialdehyde reductase defects of rutE or ydfG mutants, presuambly by overproducing NemA (Kim, 2010). The original characterization of NemA called it a cis-enoyl-CoA reductase involved in the beta-oxidation of fatty acids such as linoleic acid (Mizugaki, 1979).	b1650
ivy	ykfE	inhibitor of c-type lysozyme, periplasmic	Null	Inhibitor of c-type lysozyme, periplasmic	E. coli K-12 has three vertebrate lysozyme inhibitors, the two c-type (chicken) inhibitors membrane-bound MliC and periplamsic Ivy, and one g-type (goose) inhibitor PliG (Vanderkelen. 2010).	b0220
ykfB	None	CP4-6 prophage; uncharacterized protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Function unknown, CP4-6 putative prophage remnant	First 23 aa are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b0250
yagJ'	None	CP4-6 prophage; uncharacterized protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Pseudogene, helicase superfamily II related; CP4-6 putative prophage remnant	yagJ' encodes the last 275 residues of a predicted 857 aa protein whose missing N-terminal region probably hits COG1061. There are no intact alleles of yagJ found in E. coli or Shigella strains, but an 857 amino acid ortholog from Escherichia albertii TW07627 (UniProtKB:B1EG49) is 93% identical across the C-terminal 275 residues. yagJ' has apparently been interrupted and partially deleted by IS1C. B1EG49 and other homologs of YagJ' have been annotated as type III restriction enzyme res subunits, but the pfam04851 domain hit is partial and weak, making that functional prediction unlikely; the B1EG49 hit to the helicase superfamily II domain (COG1061) is a more reasonable prediction (3e-05).	b0276
yagK	None	CP4-6 prophage; conserved protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Function unknown, CP4-6 putative prophage remnant	Null	b0277
yagL	None	CP4-6 prophage; DNA-binding protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Function unknown, CP4-6 putative prophage remnant	Null	b0278
yagM	None	CP4-6 prophage; uncharacterized protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Function unknown, CP4-6 putative prophage remnant	Null	b0279
yagN	None	CP4-6 prophage; uncharacterized protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Function unknown, CP4-6 putative prophage remnant	Null	b0280
intF	yagO	CP4-6 prophage; putative phage integrase	Phage or Prophage Related	Putative integrase gene, CP4-6 putative prophage remnant	Null	b0281
yagP'	None	pseudogene, LysR family, fragment	Putative regulator; Not classified	Pseudogene, LysR family, fragment	An intact allele of YagP (249 aa) is ECs0305 in E. coli O157:H7 Sakai.	b4694
paoD	yagQ	moco insertion factor for PaoABC aldehyde oxidoreductase	Null	Moco insertion factor for PaoABC aldehyde oxidoreductase	yagTSRQ have been renamed as paoABCD (S. Leimkuhler, personal communication, 2010). PaoD is required for the insertion of the molybdopterin cytosine dinucleotide (MCD) cofactor into the PaoC subunit of the periplasmic aromatic aldehyde oxidoreductase PaoABC, which stabilizes PaoC (Neumann, 2009).	b0283
paoC	hsm, yagR	PaoABC aldehyde oxidoreductase, Moco-containing subunit	Enzyme; Not classified	PaoABC aldehyde oxidoreductase, Moco-containing subunit; periplasmic	yagTSRQ have been renamed as paoABCD (S. Leimkuhler, personal communication, 2010). The Moco form present in PaoC is the molybdopterin cytosine dinucleotide (MCD); PaoC is the only known protein containing MCD (Neumann, 2009). Mutant cells lacking PaoABC are growth-inhibited in the presence of the the aromatic aldehydes cinnamaldehyde, vanillin, or benzaldehyde at pH 4.0, indicating that PaoABC detoxifies aromatic aldehydes (Neumann, 2009). PaoABC has a broad in vitro specificity for aldehyde substrates, but has a preferences for aromatic aldehydes (Neumann, 2009). The active PaoABC heterotrimer, with all cofactors attached, is transported to the periplasm via the Tat translocase, mediated by a single Tat signal peptide on the PaoC subunit; periplasmic proteins PaoB and PaoA do not have their own signal peptides (Neumann, 2009). MocA is the CTP:molybdopterin cytidylyltransferase responsible for the conversion of the Mo-molybdopterin (Mo-MPT) cofactor to the molybdopterin cytosine dinucleotide (MCD) cofactor (Neumann, 2009).	b0284
paoB	yagS	PaoABC aldehyde oxidoreductase, FAD-containing subunit	Enzyme; Not classified	PaoABC aldehyde oxidoreductase, FAD-containing subunit; periplasmic	yagTSRQ have been renamed as paoABCD (S. Leimkuhler, personal communication, 2010). Mutant cells lacking PaoABC are growth-inhibited in the presence of the the aromatic aldehydes cinnamaldehyde, vanillin, or benzaldehyde at pH 4.0, indicating that PaoABC detoxifies aromatic aldehydes (Neumann, 2009). PaoABC has a broad in vitro specificity for aldehyde substrates, but has a preferences for aromatic aldehydes (Neumann, 2009). The active PaoABC heterotrimer, with all cofactors attached, is transported to the periplasm via the Tat translocase, mediated by a single Tat signal peptide on the PaoC subunit; periplasmic proteins PaoB and PaoA do not have their own signal peptides (Neumann, 2009). MocA is the CTP:molybdopterin cytidylyltransferase responsible for the conversion of the Mo-molybdopterin (Mo-MPT) cofactor to the molybdopterin cytosine dinucleotide (MCD) cofactor (Neumann, 2009). CsgD regulon, repressed.	b0285
paoA	yagT	PaoABC aldehyde oxidoreductase, 2Fe-2S subunit	Enzyme; Not classified	PaoABC aldehyde oxidoreductase, 2Fe-2S subunit; periplasmic	yagTSRQ have been renamed as paoABCD (S. Leimkuhler, personal communication, 2010). Mutant cells lacking PaoABC are growth-inhibited in the presence of the the aromatic aldehydes cinnamaldehyde, vanillin, or benzaldehyde at pH 4.0, indicating that PaoABC detoxifies aromatic aldehydes (Neumann, 2009). PaoABC has a broad in vitro specificity for aldehyde substrates, but has a preferences for aromatic aldehydes (Neumann, 2009). The active PaoABC heterotrimer, with all cofactors attached, is transported to the periplasm via the Tat translocase, mediated by a single Tat signal peptide on the PaoC subunit; periplasmic proteins PaoB and PaoA do not have their own signal peptides (Neumann, 2009). MocA is the CTP:molybdopterin cytidylyltransferase responsible for the conversion of the Mo-molybdopterin (Mo-MPT) cofactor to the molybdopterin cytosine dinucleotide (MCD) cofactor (Neumann, 2009). Verified Tat substrate: PaoA(YagT) has a predicted Tat-only (Class I) 49 aa signal peptide (Tullman-Ercek, 2007). The internal TTG at codon 23 could alternatively be utilized to make a protein with a predicted 26 aa signal peptide.	b0286
yagU	None	DUF1440 family inner membrane acid resistance protein	Null	DUF1440 family inner membrane acid resistance protein	A yagU mutation is 3-fold less resistant to pH 2 and yagU is an acid-inducible gene (Hayes, 2006).	b0287
ecpE	matF, yagV	ECP production pilus chaperone	Factor; Surface structures	Periplasmic pilus chaperone required for ECP formation	The E. coli O18ac:K1:H7 NMEC ecpABCDE(matBCDEF) genes are all individually required for E. coli common pilus (ECP) formation in the pathogenic E.coli NMEC strains and ECP production enhances low-temperature biofilm formation in NMEC and and also in K-12 when the silent ecp operon is expressed (Pouttu, 2001; Lehti, 2010; Garnett, 2012). The first 27 aa of EcpE are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. Pfam PF00345 member. ecpB and ecpE are paralogs.	b0289
ecpD	matE, yagW	polymerized tip adhesin of ECP fibers	Structural component; Surface structures	Polymerized tip adhesin of ECP fibers	EcpD has its own N-terminal extension (NTE) and can polymerize by itself as well as at the tips of EcpA fibers (Garnett, 2012). The O18ac:K1:H7 NMEC ecpRAB(matABC) genes are required for E. coli common pilus (Mat fimbria) formation when cloned in K-12; (Pouttu, 2001).The E. coli O18ac:K1:H7 NMEC ecpABCDE(matBCDEF) genes are all individually required for E. coli common pilus (ECP) formation in the pathogenic E.coli NMEC strains and ECP production enhances low-temperature biofilm formation in NMEC and and also in K-12 when the silent ecp operon is expressed; ecpR(matA) mRNA was detected in K-12, but not ecpAB(matBC) mRNA (Pouttu, 2001; Lehti, 2010; Garnett, 2012). The first 23 aa of EcpD are predicted to be a type I signal peptide, but it may be a signal anchor.	b0290
ecpC	matD, yagX	ECP production outer membrane protein	Membrane; Outer membrane constituents	Predicted ECP usher outer membrane porin protein; export, assembly and anchoring of ECP; putative EcpBE-EcpC dual chaperone-usher	EcpC is distantly related to the FimD family usher proteins and is the predicted usher protein for ECP(Mat) formation (Pfam PF00577, E = 2.12e-3) (Korea, 2010; Korea, 2011; Garnett, 2012). The O18ac:K1:H7 NMEC ecpRAB(matABC) genes are required for E. coli common pilus (ECP; Mat fimbria) formation when cloned in K-12; (Pouttu, 2001).The E. coli O18ac:K1:H7 NMEC ecpABCDE(matBCDEF) genes are all individually required for E. coli common pilus (ECP) formation in the pathogenic E.coli NMEC strains and ECP production enhances low-temperature biofilm formation in NMEC and and also in K-12 when the silent ecp operon is expressed; ecpR(matA) mRNA was detected in K-12, but not ecpAB(matBC) mRNA (Pouttu, 2001; Lehti, 2010; Garnett, 2012). EcpC contains PPE repeats.	b0291
ecpB	matC, yagY	ECP production pilus chaperone	Factor; Surface structures	Periplasmic pilus chaperone required for ECP formation	The O18ac:K1:H7 NMEC ecpRAB(matABC) genes are required for E. coli common pilus (Mat fimbria) formation when cloned in K-12; (Pouttu, 2001).The E. coli O18ac:K1:H7 NMEC ecpABCDE(matBCDEF) genes are all individually required for E. coli common pilus (ECP) formation in the pathogenic E.coli NMEC strains and ECP production enhances low-temperature biofilm formation in NMEC and and also in K-12 when the silent ecp operon is expressed; ecpR(matA) mRNA was detected in K-12, but not ecpAB(matBC) mRNA (Pouttu, 2001; Lehti, 2010; Garnett, 2012). The first 20 aa of EcpB are predicted to be a signal peptide. EcpB and EcpE are paralogous proteins with PapD-like N-terminal domains (PF00345).	b0292
ecpA	matB, yagZ	ECP pilin	Structural component; Surface structures	ECP pilin	The O18ac:K1:H7 NMEC ecpRAB(matABC) genes are required for E. coli common pilus (Mat fimbria) formation when cloned in K-12; (Pouttu, 2001).The E. coli O18ac:K1:H7 NMEC ecpABCDE(matBCDEF) genes are all individually required for E. coli common pilus (ECP) formation in the pathogenic E.coli NMEC strains and ECP production enhances low-temperature biofilm formation in NMEC and and also in K-12 when the silent ecp operon is expressed; ecpR(matA) mRNA was detected in K-12, but not ecpAB(matBC) mRNA (Pouttu, 2001; Lehti, 2010; Garnett, 2012). The EcpA(MatB) crystal structure is from strain CFT073 and differs from the K-12 sequence at two positions (Garnett, 2012). EcpA is subject to SecB-dependent cleavage (Marani, 2006).	b0293
wza	None	colanic acid export protein; outer membrane auxillary lipoprotein	Transport; Not classified	Colanic acid export channel lipoprotein; outer membrane auxillary protein	The OMA family outer membrane channel lipoprotein Wza is required for the exopolysaccharide (EPS) colanic acid to be translocated through the outer membrane (Paulsen, 1997). Wza structure and function is inferred by analogy with the Wza function translocating group 1 K30 capsular polysaccharide in E. coli E69 (O9a:K30) (Drummelsmith, 2000; Nesper, 2003; Beis, 2004; Reid, 2005; Dong, 2006). K-12 wza complements a K30 wza mutation (Reid, 2005). gfcE and wza are paralogs. The first 20 aa of Wza are a type II signal peptide. otherPDB(E. coli K30): 2J58 (Dong, 2006). otherPDB(E. coli K30): 2W8H, 2W8I (Hagelueken, 2009).	b2062
wzb	None	colanic acid production protein-tyrosine-phosphatase; Wzc-P dephosphorylase	Enzyme; Not classified	Protein-tyrosine-phosphatase; required for extracellular colanic acid production; dephosphorylates Wzc-P; induced by AI-2 pheromone	Wzb activates colanic acid synthesis for capsule production by dephosphorylating the autokinased Wzc-P tyrosine-protein kinase (Vincent, 1999; Vincent, 2000; Grangeasse, 2002). Wzb also dephosphorylates Etp-P in vitro and the cryptic Etp phosphatase dephosphorylates Wzb-P in vitro (Vincent, 2000). Wzc belongs to the low molecular weight phosphotyrosine protein phosphatase (LMWPc) family (Pfam PF01451).	b2061
wzc	None	colanic acid production tyrosine-protein kinase; autokinase; Ugd phosphorylase	Enzyme; Not classified	Tyrosine-protein kinase; required for extracellular colanic acid production; autokinase; phosphorylates Ugd	Wzb activates colanic acid synthesis for capsule production by dephosphorylating the autokinased Wzc-P tyrosine-protein kinase (Vincent, 1999; Vincent, 2000; Grangeasse, 2002). Wzc is autophosphorylated intra-molecularly at Y569 and inter-molecularly at Y708, Y710, Y711, Y713 and Y715, as experimentally demonstrated by site-directed mutagenesis and in vitro kinase assays; the Wzc Walker A ATP-binding site motif is required for intra-phosphorylation at Y569: Y569-P is required for inter-phosphorylation of the C-terminal tyrosine residues (Grangeasse, 2002). Wzc-P is also dephosphorylated in vitro by the cryptic Etp phosphatase (Vincent, 2000). Wzc has ATPAse activity (Soulat, 2007). Wzc is a membrane-bound protein with two transmembrane segments flanking a short N-terminal cytoplasmic region, a large periplasmic domain, and a large C-terminal catalytic cytoplasmic domain (Doublet, 2002).	b2060
wcaA	None	putative glycosyl transferase	Putative regulator; Not classified	Putative colanic acid biosynthesis glycosyl transferase	Null	b2059
wcaB	None	putative acyl transferase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Predicted colanic acid biosynthesis acetyltransferase	WcaB contains hexapeptide repeats.	b2058
wcaC	None	putative glycosyl transferase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Putative colanic acid biosynthesis glycosyl transferase	Null	b2057
wcaD	None	putative colanic acid polymerase	Putative enzyme; Phage-related functions and prophages	Putative colanic acid polymerase	Null	b2056
wcaE	None	putative glycosyl transferase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Predicted colanic acid biosynthesis glycosyl transferase; required for swarming phenotype	Null	b2055
wcaF	None	putative acyl transferase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Predicted colanic acid biosynthesis acetyltransferase	WcaF contains hexapeptide repeats.	b2054
wcaJ	None	colanic biosynthesis UDP-glucose lipid carrier transferase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Colanic biosynthesis UDP-glucose lipid carrier transferase	WcaJ was shown to be a UDP-glucose:undecaprenyl phosphate glucose-1-P transferase, but complementation of Salmonella wcaP also indicated a low level of galactose-1-phosphate transferase activity (Patel, 2012). Overexpression causes abnormal biofilm architecture.	b2047
wzxC	wzx	putative colanic acid exporter	Putative transport; Protein, peptide secretion	Predicted colanic acid translocating flippase	Null	b2046
wcaK	None	colanic acid biosynthesis protein	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Colanic acid biosynthesis protein	Overexpression causes a decrease in the amount of biofilm formed.	b2045
wcaN	galF	putative regulatory subunit for GalU	Putative enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Sugar-nucleotide biosynthesis, conversions	Putative regulatory subunit for GalU	Not required for colanic acid synthesis. Does not have UDP-glucose pyrophosphorylase actvitiy. Homologous to GalU.	b2042
rclC	None	reactive chlorine species (RCS) stress resistance inner membrane protein	Null	Reactive chlorine species (RCS) stress resistance protein; DUF417 family inner membrane protein	RclR is a reactive chlorine stress (RCS)-sensing transcriptional activator that up-regulates itself 10-fold and the divergent operon rcsABC more than 100-fold (Gray, 2013; Parker, 2013). An rclC deletion has increased hypochlorous acid (HOCl) sensitivity (Parker, 2013).	b0301
rclA	ykgC	reactive chlorine stress species (RCS) resistance protein; pyridine nucleotide-dependent disulfide oxidoreductase family	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Reactive chlorine species (RCS) stress resistance protein; pyridine nucleotide-dependent disulfide oxidoreductase family	RclR is a reactive chlorine stress (RCS)-sensing transcriptional activator that up-regulates itself 10-fold and the divergent operon rcsABC more than 100-fold (Gray, 2013; Parker, 2013). An rclA deletion has increased hypochlorous acid (HOCl) sensitivity (Parker, 2013). RclA has an N-terminal pyridine nucleotide-disulphide oxidoreductase domain (Pfam PF07992) and a C-terminal dimerization domain (Pfam PF02852).	b0304
rclR	ykgD	reactive chlorine species (RCS)-specific activator of the rcl genes	Regulator; Not classified	Reactive chlorine species (RCS)-specific activator, rcl genes	RclR is a reactive chlorine stress (RCS)-sensing transcriptional activator that up-regulates its own transcription 10-fold and that of the divergent operon rcsABC more than 100-fold (Gray, 2013; Parker, 2013). An rclR deletion has increased hypochlorous acid (HOCl) sensitivity; RclR uses a reversible oxidation of redox-sensitive cysteine residues to sense reactive chlorine stress; RclR treatment with N-chlorotaurine induces rcl promoter region-specific DNA binding that is reversible by DTT; a Cys21-Cys89 disulfide bond probably forms in vivo, as both C21A and C89A mutations in the N-terminal sensing domain of RclR lose in vivo activator function, but only C21 is required for in vitro N-chlorotaurine-responsive DNA-binding of the C-terminal DNA-binding domain suggesting that initial oxidation of C21 is likely to be the primary molecular response to RCS stress; RclR H42A and H75A mutants display constitutive activation in vivo and N-chlorotaurine-independent DNA-binding in vitro as well as increased peroxide-induced DNA-binding, and thus are likely to be involved in protecting the RCS-specificity of RclR-mediated transcriptional activation of rcl gene expression (Parker, 2013). RclR has an N-terminal Cupin-6 domain (Pfam PF12852) and a C-terminal AraC-related HTH_18 domain (Pfam PF12833).	b0305
ykgE	None	cysteine-rich LutA family protein; putative electron transport chain YkgEFG component	Putative carrier; Energy metabolism, carbon: Electron transport	Cysteine-rich LutA family protein; predicted electron transport chain YkgEFG component; predicted lactate-related compound oxidative catabolism	YkgEFG is homologous to the B. subtilis LutABC oxidative lactate catabolism putative electron chain, but ykgEFG does not complement lutABC, perhaps indicating a lactate-related compound is catabolized by YkgEFG; a ykgF mutant is still able to utilize lactate, presumably utilizing LldPRD function (Chai, 2009). YkgE is comprised of two cysteine-rich putative iron-sulfur binding cluster domains (Pfam PF02754) each with invariant CCG motifs and two conserved single Cys residues. YkgE is homologous to the C-terminal domains of GlpC and GlcF.	b0306
ykgF	None	ferridoxin-like LutB family protein; putative electron transport chain YkgEFG component	Putative carrier; Energy metabolism, carbon: Electron transport	Ferridoxin-like LutB family protein; predicted electron transport chain YkgEFG component; predicted lactate-related compound oxidative catabolism	YkgEFG is homologous to the B. subtilis LutABC oxidative lactate catabolism putative electron chain, but ykgEFG does not complement lutABC, perhaps indicating a lactate-related compound is catabolized by YkgEFG; a ykgF mutant is still able to utilize lactate, presumably utilizing LldPRD function (Chai, 2009). YkgF is comprised of a LutB family domain (Pfam PF02589), followed by a 4Fe-4S dicluster domain (PF13183) and a C-terminal DUF3390 domain (PF11870); the LutC family domain (Pfam PF02589) belongs to a 5-formyltetrahydrofolate cyclo-ligase-like superfamily (InterPro IPR024185) and a NagB/RpiA/CoA transferase-like structural clan (Superfamily SSF100950).	b0307
ykgG	None	LutC family protein; putative electron transport chain YkgEFG component	Putative carrier; Energy metabolism, carbon: Electron transport	LutC family protein; predicted electron transport chain YkgEFG component; predicted lactate-related compound oxidative catabolism	YkgEFG is homologous to the B. subtilis LutABC oxidative lactate catabolism putative electron chain, but ykgEFG does not complement lutABC, perhaps indicating a lactate-related compound is catabolized by YkgEFG; a ykgF mutant is still able to utilize lactate, presumably utilizing LldPRD function (Chai, 2009). YkfG is comprised of a LutC family domain (Pfam PF02589); the N-terminal domain of LutB is a LutC-like domain; the LutC family domain (Pfam PF02589) belongs to a 5-formyltetrahydrofolate cyclo-ligase-like superfamily (InterPro IPR024185) and a NagB/RpiA/CoA transferase-like structural clan (Superfamily SSF100950).	b0308
ykgH	None	putative inner membrane protein	Null	Function unknown	Null	b0310
yahB	None	putative DNA-bindng transcriptional regulator	Putative regulator; Not classified	LysR family of transcriptional regulators, function unknown	Null	b0316
yahC	None	putative inner membrane protein	Null	Predicted inner membrane protein, function unknown	Null	b0317
yahD	None	ankyrin repeat protein	Putative regulator; Not classified	Ankyrin repeat protein, function unknown	Null	b0318
yahE	None	DUF2877 family protein	Null	DUF2877 family protein, function unknown	Null	b0319
yahF	None	putative NAD(P)-binding succinyl-CoA synthase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	CoA ligase family protein, function unknown	YahF has an central predicted CoA-binding domain (Pfam PF02629) and a C-terminal CoA ligase-like domain (Pfam PF00549).	b0320
yahG	None	DUF1116 family protein	Null	DUF1116 family protein, function unknown	yahG and ylbE are paralogs; YahG has a 50 aa N-terminal domain missing from YlbE.	b0321
yahI	None	carbamate kinase-like protein	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Carbonate kinase homolog	yqeA, yahI and ybcF are paralogs.	b0323
yahJ	None	putative metallo-dependent hydrolase domain deaminase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Cytosine deaminase-related protein, function unknown	YahJ has been purified and shown not to have isoguanine deaminase activity (Hitchcock, 2011). Verified Tat substrate: YahJ has a Tat/Sec (Class II) predicted 33 aa signal peptide (Tullman-Ercek, 2007). M38 peptidase family.	b0324
yahK	None	broad specificity NADPH-dependent aldehyde reductase, Zn-containing	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Aldehyde reductase, NADPH-dependent, Zn-containing; AdhZ2; broad specificity	YahK binds zinc (Sevcenco, 2011). HT_Cmplx44_Mem: GlpC+KdgK+YahK.	b0325
yahL	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Uncharacterized protein, function unknown	Null	b0326
yahM	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Function unknown	Null	b0327
yahN	None	amino acid exporter for proline, lysine, glutamate, homoserine	Transport; Not classified	Amino acid exporter for proline, lysine, glutamate, homoserine	YahN overproduction confers resistance to proline and increases export of proline, lysine, and glutamate (Livshits et al., US Patent No. 7527950, filed on 5/5/2009). YahN overproduction confers sensitivity to L-homoserine and L-homoserine lactone (Eggeling, 2003). LysE, RhtB transporter family.	b0328
yahO	None	periplasmic protein, function unknown, YhcN family	Null	DUF1471 family periplasmic protein, function unknown	YahO has been detected in lysates of three non-K-12 strains in which the cleavage of the 21 aa signal peptide is confirmed by MS (Fagerquist, 2010). RpoS regulon. otherPDB(S.typhimurium): 2MA4 (Eletsky, 2014).	b0329
prpR	yahP	propionate catabolism operon regulatory protein	Regulator; Not classified	Transcriptional regulator of prp operon; propionate catabolism via 2-methylcitrate cycle, characterized primarily in Salmonella	Crp regulon.	b0330
prpB	yahQ	2-methylisocitrate lyase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	2-Methylisocitrate lyase; propionate catabolism via 2-methylcitrate cycle, characterized primarily in Salmonella	Repressed during biofilm formation. Crp regulon.	b0331
prpD	acnC, yahT	2-methylcitrate dehydratase	Null	2-methylcitrate dehydratase; propionate catabolism via 2-methylcitrate cycle; monomeric iron-sulfur protein	PrpD is a 2-methylcitrate dehydratase that can also use citrate, isocitrate and cis-aconitate as substrates (Blank, 2002; Brock, 2002). PrpD(AcnC) is responsible for the 5% residual aconitase activity found in an acnAB double mutant but overproduction of prpD(acnC) does not alleviate the acnAB mutant phenotypes (Gruer, 1997; Blank, 2002; Brock, 2002). The N-terminal amino acid sequence of purified PrpD was determined but the native RBS was not used so it is not in the Verified Set; the fMet is clipped (Blank, 2002). Crp regulon.	b0334
prpE	yahU	propionate--CoA ligase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Propionate-CoA ligase	prpE is in the prp operon for propionate catabolism via 2-methylcitrate cycle in Salmonella but a prpE mutant still grows well on propionate but prpE acs double mutants do not, indicating that acetyl-CoA synthase can substitute for prpE (Horswill, 1999b). Crp regulon.	b0335
yaiT'	yaiU	pseudogene, autotransporter family	Putative structure; Not classified	Pseudogene reconstruction, autotransporter family; interrupted by IS3B	The first 27 aa of YaiT are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b4580
yaiV	None	putative transcriptional regulator	Null	Predicted transcriptional regulator, function unknown	Null	b0375
yaiW	None	microcin Bac7 uptake protein; outer membrane surface-exposed lipoprotein	Null	Microcin Bac7 uptake protein; outer membrane surface-exposed lipoprotein	The lipoprotein nature, outer membrane localization and surface exposure of Salmonella YaiW expressed in E. coli was demonstrated experimentally; due to the high similarity of E. coli and Salmonella YaiW, this result has been extrapolated to E. coli YaiW; E. coli K-12 MG1655 yaiW mutants have slightly increased resistance to the proline-rich Bac7(1-35) truncated antimicrobial peptide and Bac7 peptide internalization was reduced by 50%; sbmA and yaiW are co-expressed (Arnold, 2013). The first 20 aa of YaiW are predicted to be a type II signal peptide.	b0378
proY	hisY, yajM	proline-specific permease	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	Probable histidine or proline permease	ProY has been identified as a proline transporter when overproduced in Salmonella, but this function has not been demonstrated in E. coli (Liao, 1997). Multicopy proY was found to facilitate histidine import in E. coli (Patrick, 2007).	b0402
yajO	None	2-carboxybenzaldehyde reductase	Null	2-carboxybenzaldehyde reductase	YajO, an AKR7A5 family aldo-keto reductase, reduces 2-carboxybenzaldehyde like other AKR7A family enzymes; but significant activities with other substrates, including other aromatic aldehydes, glyceraldehyde, glucuronic acid, methylglyoxal, phenylglyoxal, and xylose, were not detected (Ko, 2005). YajO does not have glyoxal or glycolaldehyde reductase activity and a yajO deletion does not increase sensitivity to glyoxal, glycolaldehyde or methylglyoxal (Lee, 2013). Using a mutant strain that accumulates toxic levels of methylglyoxal, it was observed that a yajO deletion strain has a 40% higher level of methylgloxal catabolites (acetol and 1,2-PDO) than a yajO+ strain, although the reason for this elevated catabolite level is not known (Ko, 2005). YajO requires GroE (GroES and GroEL) for proper folding in vivo (Kerner, 2005; Fujiwara, 2010).	b0419
dxs	yajP	1-deoxyxylulose-5-phosphate synthase, thiamine triphosphate-binding, FAD-requiring	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	DXP synthase; DXP is precursor to isoprenoids, thiamine, pyridoxol	Null	b0420
yajQ	None	phage Phi6 host factor, ATP/GTP binding protein	Null	Cell survival gene, function unknown, UPF0234 family; binds tRNA, ATP and GTP; activator of phage Phi6 L segment transcription; Phi6 host factor; low abundance protein	YajQ is a survival protein required for MazF-mediated survival of a small subpopulation after inhibition of translation (Amitai, 2009). YajQ indirectly activates phage Phi6 L segment transcription indirectly by binding to the Phi6 core structural protein P1 (Qiao, 2008). The verified N-terminal sequence observed was PSAF, but the conceptual translation is (M)PSF, lacking the alanine residue (Saveanu, 2002). NMR solution structure determined for E. coli YajQ (Saveanu, 2002). otherPDB (H. influenzae): 1IN0. Binds TrxA (Kumar, 2004). UPF0234 DUF520 family.	b0426
yajR	None	putative transporter	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative transporter, function unknown; no overexpression resistances found	The crystal structure of E. coli YajR 3WDO is derived from strain BL21 and has six amino acid differences as compared to the K-12 alelle (Jiang, 2013). Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS).	b0427
allA	glxA2, ybbT	ureidoglycolate lyase, releasing urea	Enzyme; Purine nitrogen catabolism	Ureidoglycolate lyase, releasing urea	Ureidoglycolate is converted to glyoxylate and urea by AllA, which is not required for allantoin catabolism (Cusa, 1999; Werner, 2010). The crystal structure of AllA from E. coli O157:H7 (PDB:1YQC) differs from K-12 at a single position, C51R (Raymond, 2005). The crystal structure of AllA from Shigella flexneri (PDB:1XSR) differs from K-12 at a single position, C51R. AllA has long been misannotated as ureidoglycolate hydrolase in many database entries and publications (Percudani, 2013).	b0505
allR	gclR, glxA3, ybbU	glyoxylate-inducible transcriptional repressor of all and gcl operons	Regulator; Purine nitrogen catabolism	Repressor for all (allantoin) and gcl (glyoxylate) operons; glyoxylate-inducible	Structural and mutational studies establish the C-terminal domain of AllR(GclR) as the glyoxylate-binding domain (Walker, 2006). AllR(GclR) and IclR can bind to the same DNA sequence so IclR binds to the AllR(GclR) binding site at the gcl promoter but a deletion of IclR has no effect on gcl transcription, implying other factor(s) may be involved (Walker, 2006).	b0506
ybbW	allP, glxB2	putative allantoin transporter	Putative transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	Putative allantoin permease, glyoxylate-inducible or allantoin-inducible (anaerobic)	Null	b0511
allB	glxB3, ybbX	allantoinase	Enzyme; Purine nitrogen catabolism	Allantoinase: allantoin for anaerobic nitrogen; tetrameric	Null	b0512
ybbY	glxB4	putative uracil/xanthine transporter	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative xanthine/uracil permease, function unknown; glyoxylate-inducible	Null	b0513
glxK	glxB5, ybbZ	glycerate kinase II	Null	Glycerate 3-kinase, glyoxylate-inducible; GKII; produces 3-phospho-glycerate	Null	b0514
allE	glxB6, ughY, ylbA	S-ureidoglycine aminohydrolase	Enzyme; Purine nitrogen catabolism	S-ureidoglycine aminohydrolase: allantoin for anaerobic nitrogen; allantoin- and glyoxylate-inducible anaerobically	The AllE(UghY, YlbA) S-ureidoglycine aminohydrolase catalyzes the second reaction in allantoin anaaerobic degradation (Wener, 2010; Serventi, 2010). AllE has a central Cupin_3 (PF05899) domain and an N-terminal Cupin_2 (PF07883) domain. 15/58 AllE(YlbA) peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed (Maillet, 2007).	b0515
allC	glxB7, ylbB	allantoate amidohydrolase	Enzyme; Purine nitrogen catabolism	Allantoate amidohydrolase: allantoin for anaerobic nitrogen	Allantoate is converted to S-ureidoglycine by AllC (Werner, 2010, 2010; Serventi, 2010).	b0516
allD	glxB8, ylbC	ureidoglycolate dehydrogenase	Enzyme; Purine nitrogen catabolism	Ureidoglycolate dehydrogenase: allantoin for anaerobic nitrogen	Null	b0517
mhpF	None	acetaldehyde-CoA dehydrogenase II, NAD-binding	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Acetaldehyde dehydrogenase, acylating; utilizes MHP	Null	b0351
ylbF	None	putative anaerobic allantoin catabolic oxamate carbamoyltransferase; DUF2877 family protein	Putative enzyme; Purine nitrogen catabolism	Predicted oxamate carbamoyltransferase, anaerobic allantoin introgen catabolism; DUF2877 family protein	Based in part on a gene context analysis, YlbF has been proposed to be the orphan enzyme oxamate carbamoyltransferase (OXTCase) needed for anaerobic allantoin catabolism (Smith, 2012).	b0520
ybcK	None	DLP12 prophage; putative phage recombinase/integrase	Phage or Prophage Related	Putative phage recombinase/integrase, DLP12 prophage	YbcK has four apparent domains: an N-terminal resolvase-like domain (PF00239), followed by a recombinase-like domain (PF07508), then a putative DNA-binding zinc beta ribbon domain (PF13408) and a C-terminal Pfam-B domain (PB007612). 	b0544
ybcL	None	DLP12 prophage; inactive polymorphonuclear leukocyte migration suppressor; UPF0098 family secreted protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Inactive polymorphonuclear leukocyte migration suppressor; Raf kinase inhibitor RKIP homolog; UPF0098 family; periplasmic; DLP12 prophage	ybcL is an inactive allele encoding a suppressor of periplasmic transepithelial neutrophil [polymorphonuclear leukocyte (PMN)] migration that is secereted from UPEC strains during infection; T78V is responsible for the allelic inactivation (Lau, 2012).	b0545
ybcM	None	DLP12 prophage; putative DNA-binding transcriptional regulator	Phage or Prophage Related	Putative transcriptional activator, lethality reduction protein; DLP12 prophage; AraC family	Mutations in ybcM have a hyperlethality phenotype when cells are stressed; YbcM is a protein that reduces the lethal effects of stress (Han, 2010).	b0546
ybcN	None	DLP12 prophage; SSB and ssDNA binding protein; putative recombination protein	Phage or Prophage Related	SSB and ssDNA binding protein, DLP12 prophage; putative recombination protein	YbcN was reported to selectively bind G:T-mismatched DNA and to have base-flipping activity but a later study could not confirm the preferential binding to mismatched dsDNA (Chen, 2008; Curtis, 2014). YbcN is a distant homolog of the phage lambda orf recombinase, YbcN preferentially binds to ssDNA and YbcN binds to the C-terminus of SSB (Curtis, 2014). In a global protein-protein interaction study SSB and YbcN were found to interact (Arifuzzaman, 2006). 	b0547
ybcO	None	DLP12 prophage; DUF1364 family protein	Phage or Prophage Related	DUF1364 family protein, DLP12 prophage	Null	b0549
quuD	ybcQ	DLP12 prophage; putative antitermination protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Q-like transcriptional regulator, DLP12 prophage; up-regulator of essD; QDLP12; capable of substituting for lambda Q protein	The probable transcription antiterminator QuuD(YbaQ) binds to the essD promoter region and increases transcription of the lysis cassette genes essD(ybcQ), rrrD(ybcS), rzpD(ybcT) and rzoD; quuD(ybaQ) mutants have reduced biofilm formation via down-regulation of curlin(CsgA); overexpression of QuuD(YbaQ) increases cell lysis and biofilm formation (Rueggeberg, 2013). QuuD(YbaQ) is a phage antiterminator Q protein family 1 domain member (pfam06530). Transcriptional antiterminator proteins bind to RNA polymerase and allow readthrough of rho-independent terminators, positively regulating the expression of downstream genes.	b0551
essD	ybcR	DLP12 prophage; putative phage lysis protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Prophage DLP12 S holin lysis protein	The probable transcription antiterminator QuuD(YbaQ) binds to the essD promoter region and increases transcription of the lysis cassette genes essD(ybcQ), rrrD(ybcS), rzpD(ybcT) and rzoD; quuD(ybaQ) mutants have reduced biofilm formation via down-regulation of curlin(CsgA); overexpression of QuuD(YbaQ) increases cell lysis and biofilm formation (Rueggeberg, 2013). Overexpression of EssD-GFP causes cell death (Srividhya, 2012).	b0554
rrrD	arrD, ybcS	DLP12 prophage; putative lysozyme	Phage or Prophage Related	Phage lambda lysozyme R protein homolog, DLP12 prophage	RrrD(YbcS) and RrrQ(YdfQ) are distant homologs of the phage lambda lysozyme R protein, as evidenced by all three matching to the pfam00959 profile (E values for pfam00959 hits using NCBI Conserved Domain (CD) Search: RrrD [4e-28]; RrrQ [1e-20]; lambda lysozyme R protein [5e-18]. The first 21 aa of RrrD are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. The previous R homolog names arrQ and arrD have been changed to rrrQ and rrrD because arrS is an sRNA gene name.	b0555
rzpD	Rz, ybcT	DLP12 prophage; putative murein endopeptidase	Phage or Prophage Related	Rz homolog, DLP12 prophage	Overexpression causes abnormal biofilm architecture.	b0556
borD	iss, ybcU	DLP12 prophage; putative lipoprotein	Phage or Prophage Related	Lipoprotein in DLP12 prophage; possibly involved in bacterial virulence	Mg(2+) stimulon-PhoPQ regulon. Overexpression causes abnormal biofilm architecture. Homolog of bacteriophage lambda bor protein. The first 16 aa of BorD are a type II signal peptide.	b0557
ybcV	None	DLP12 prophage; DUF1398 family protein	Phage or Prophage Related	DUF1398 family protein, DLP12 prophage	YbcV (DLP12), YdfO (Qin) and YcgX are paralogs of the DUF1398 family encoding phage and prophage proteins found exclusively in E. coli and Salmonella; ycgX is not annotated as being within a prophage but it is only two kilobases away from the e14 prophage and may be a misplaced e14 gene.	b0558
ybcW	None	DLP12 prophage; uncharacterized protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Function unknown, DLP12 prophage	Sequences related to ybcW are only found in E. coli prophages.	b0559
tfaD'	ybcX	pseudogene, DLP12 prophage; tail fiber assembly protein family	Phage or Prophage Related	Pseudogene, tail fiber assembly gene, DLP12 prophage; C-terminal fragment	Null	b0561
ybcY'	None	pseudogene, DLP12 prophage; methyltransferase homology	Phage or Prophage Related	Pseudogene reconstruction, predicted methyltransferase, DLP12	A two base pair deletion has removed the "G" of the ATG start codon and one "A" of the second codon (for lysine). The intact YbcY protein from E. coli O157:H7 is Z1925. An ALT_INIT at -4 codons of Z1925 is used in the frameshift reconstruction.	b0562
cusS	silS(S.t.), ybcZ	copper-sensing histidine kinase in two-component regulatory system with CusR	Putative regulator; Not classified	Copper ion sensor regulating cusCFBA expression; may also sense silver	Null	b0570
ybdJ	None	DUF1158 family putative inner membrane protein	Null	DUF1158 family putative inner membrane protein; function unknown	Probable false positive lipoprotein prediction, Cys not conserved, 2 CM TMs predicted. DUF1158 family (Pfam PF06643) members are restricterd to enterobacterial genomes.	b0580
ybdK	None	weak gamma-glutamyl:cysteine ligase	Null	Weak gamma-glutamyl:cysteine ligase activity	Null	b0581
citC	ybeO	citrate lyase ligase; [citrate [pro-3S]-lyase] ligase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	Citrate lyase ligase; [citrate [pro-3S]-lyase] ligase	The N-terminal periplasmic sensor domain of CitA functions as a high-affinity citrate receptor (Kaspar, 2002). E. coli cannot use citrate as a carbon and energy source for aerobic growth like Klebsiella does (Koser, 1924). Citrate can be catabolized during anaerobic growth in the presence of an oxidizable co-substrate such as glucose, lactose or glycerol; the co-substrate provides needed reducing power (Lütgens, 1980). Aerobic utilization of citrate is blocked by low CitT transporter expression, which can be overcome using a plasmid-encoded transporter (Pos, 1998). In addition to inducing the cit operon and citAB, adding citrate to anaerobic cultures up-regulates the mdh gene needed to convert the oxoaloacetate product to malate (Yamamoto, 2008). The cytoplasmic transmitter domain of autophosphorylated CitA transphosphorylates the CitB receiver domain, causing the CitB DNA-binding output HTH domain to bind to the citCDEFXGT-citAB divergent promoter region and activate transcription of both operons; the reduction of CitA Cys529 is essential for autophosphorylation, perhaps acting as an oxygen-sensing inhibition mechanism restricting cit gene expression to the anaerobic growth conditions that enable citrate-glucose co-fermentation (Yamamoto, 2008; Yamamoto, 2009). CitAB(DpiBA) has been reported to be involved in beta-lactam antibiotic resistance; the citC-T and citAB(dpiBA) operons are induced by beta-lactam treatment and by shifting an ftsI(ts) strain to the non-permissive temperature, in a citB(dpiA)-independent mechanism; both treatments also induce the lexA-, recA-dependent SOS response, dependent upon the citB(dpiA) induction, and lexA or recA mutants block the SOS-dependent antibiotic-induced induction of the cit genes; the antibiotic MICs are not affected by citA or citB mutations; the plating efficiency of a citB(dpiA) mutant is reduced 10-fold as compared to wildtype cells after overnight antibiotic exposure in liquid cultures (Miller, 2004). Plasmid-based overexpression of CitB(DpiA) increases fosfomycin resistance, but has no effect on beta-lactam resistance (Hirakawa, 2003a; Hirakawa, 2003b).	b0618
citA	criS(S.f.), dpiB, mpdB, ybeP	sensory histidine kinase in two-component regulatory system with CitB	Regulator; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Sensor histidine kinase for the citCDEFXGT operon; citrate-binding; two-component system, with CitB; citrate-independent beta-lactam-induction	The N-terminal periplasmic sensor domain of CitA functions as a high-affinity citrate receptor (Kaspar, 2002). E. coli cannot use citrate as a carbon and energy source for aerobic growth like Klebsiella does (Koser, 1924). Citrate can be catabolized during anaerobic growth in the presence of an oxidizable co-substrate such as glucose, lactose or glycerol; the co-substrate provides needed reducing power (Lütgens, 1980). Aerobic utilization of citrate is blocked by low CitT transporter expression, which can be overcome using a plasmid-encoded transporter (Pos, 1998). In addition to inducing the cit operon and citAB, adding citrate to anaerobic cultures up-regulates the mdh gene needed to convert the oxoaloacetate product to malate (Yamamoto, 2008). The cytoplasmic transmitter domain of autophosphorylated CitA transphosphorylates the CitB receiver domain, causing the CitB DNA-binding output HTH domain to bind to the citCDEFXGT-citAB divergent promoter region and activate transcription of both operons; the reduction of CitA Cys529 is essential for autophosphorylation, perhaps acting as an oxygen-sensing inhibition mechanism restricting cit gene expression to the anaerobic growth conditions that enable citrate-glucose co-utilization (Yamamoto, 2008; Yamamoto, 2009). CitAB(DpiBA) has been reported to be involved in beta-lactam antibiotic resistance; the citC-T and citAB(dpiBA) operons are induced by beta-lactam treatment and by shifting an ftsI(ts) strain to the non-permissive temperature, in a citB(dpiA)-independent mechanism; both treatments also induce the lexA-, recA-dependent SOS response, dependent upon the citB(dpiA) induction, and lexA or recA mutants block the SOS-dependent antibiotic-induced induction of the cit genes; the antibiotic MICs are not affected by citA or citB mutations; the plating efficiency of a citB(dpiA) mutant is reduced 10-fold as compared to wildtype cells after overnight antibiotic exposure in liquid cultures (Miller, 2004). Plasmid-based overexpression of CitB(DpiA) increases fosfomycin resistance, but has no effect on beta-lactam resistance (Hirakawa, 2003a; Hirakawa, 2003b). Deletion of citAB(dpiBA) did not change the sensitivity to 240 antibiotics and other growth inhibitors; likewise phenotypes were unaltered in ~1000 other assays such as various carbon and nitrogen source utilizations; the anaerobic utilization of citrate was not tested (Zhou, 2003). In vivo overproduced CitAB(DpiBA) stimulates the citC promoter and represses the appY promoter (Ingmar, 1998). Among other functions, the global transcriptional regulator AppY stimulates expression of the anaerobically-induced energy metabolism operons hyaA-F and cbdABX-appA (Brøndsted, 1996; Atlung, 1996; Atlung, 1997). Overproduced CitA(DpiB) destabilizes pSC101 (and other) plasmid inheritance, hence the synonyms dpiAB, and induces the SOS repsonse, acting by CitB(DpiA) binding to the AT-rich plasmid ori region and the chromosomal origin, respectively; citAB(dpiBA) mutants have no effect on plasmid inheritance (Ingmer, 1998; Miller, 2003). The citA(criR) gene was identified as a transcriptional regulator of the ipa pathogenicity island in Shigella flexneri, but E. coli K-12 does not have the ipa genes (Qi, 1996; Walker, 2002). ChiX(RybC,MicM) regulates citAB(dpiBA) mRNA; citAB(dpiBA) mRNA may be a ChiX trap-mRNA (also called an RNA decoy) (Mandin, 2009).	b0619
ybeQ	None	Sel1 family TPR-like repeat protein	Null	Sel1 family TPR-like repeat protein, function unknown	Although a wildtype strain was unaffected, a ybeQ deletion mutant exhibited 5% survival after 20 minutes in 2.5 mM hydrogen peroxide (Kri Ko, 2014). YbeQ is comprised of eight tandem Sel1 TPR-like repeat domains.	b0644
ybeR	None	DUF1266 family protein	Null	DUF1266 family protein	Null	b0645
djlB	ybeS	putative HscC co-chaperone, uncharacterized J domain-containing protein	Putative factor; Chaperones	Predicted HscC co-chaperone; uncharacterized J domain-containing protein	DjlB is an uncharacterized DnaJ homolog (J domain-containing protein, JDP) that is a predicted HscC co-chaperone stimulating its chaperone partner's ATPase activity because of its similarities to known type III JDP DjlC HscC co-chaperone including (a) 50% protein sequence identity (65% similarity), (b) conserved N-terminal DnaK-like protein-interacting J-domains, (c) membrane tail-anchors (TAMP proteins) and (d) hscC-proximal gene locations; however, because DjlB overproduction is toxic it has not been purified or tested for HscC co-chaperone activity (Itoh, 1999; Kluck, 2002). djlB djlC double mutants are viable and have a reduced growth yield in the presence of cadmium (Kluck, 2002). The djlB mutants in the Keio collection have been shown to harbor an intact copy of djlB in addition to the deletion allele (Yamamoto, 2009).	b0646
ybeT	None	Sel1 family TPR-like repeat protein	Null	Sel1 family TPR-like repeat protein; function unknown	YbeT is comprised of three tandem Sel1 TPR-like repeat domains preceded by an unidentifiable N-terminal domain. YbeT has a probable false positive lipoprotein prediction because the Cys is not conserved.	b0647
ybeU	None	DUF1266 family protein	Putative enzyme; Not classified	DUF1266 family protein	Null	b0648
djlC	hscD, ybeV	J domain-containing HscC co-chaperone; Hsc56	Factor; Chaperones	HscC co-chaperone, J domain-containing; tail-anchored membrane protein; Hsc56	Co-chaperone DjlC is a tail-anchored membrane protein that stimulates the ATPase activity of the DnaK-like chaperone HscC(Hsc62) (Kluck, 2002).	b0649
hscC	ybeW	Hsp70 family chaperone Hsc62; RpoD-binding transcription inhibitor	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Hsc62, DnaK-like chaperone; binds to RpoD and inhibits transcription; inhibits growth when overexpressed; Hsc56(DjlC) is DnaJ-like co-chaperone; ATPase activity is stimulated by GrpE, DjlC; mutant grows slow and is hypersensitive to Cd(II) and UV	dnaK, hscA, hscC and yegD are paralogs.	b0650
ybeX	corC(S.t.)	putative ion transport	Putative transport; Not classified	Heat shock protein, putative Co2+ and Mg2+ efflux protein; contains two CBS domains	YbeX has been shown to be a heat shock protein and to be in the RpoH regulon (Nonaka, 2006). YbeX(CorC) of Salmonella has been shown to be involved in Co2+ and Mg2+ efflux (Gibson, 1991). YbeX has structural similarity to the regulatory domain from d-3-phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase.	b0658
ybeY	None	ssRNA-specific endoribonuclease; 16S rRNA 3' end maturation and quality control co-endoribonuclease working with RNase R; rRNA transcription antitermination factor	Null	ssRNA-specific endoribonuclease; co-endoribonuclease working with RNase R in 16S rRNA 3' end maturation and quality control; rRNA transcription antitermination factor	YbeY and RNase R work together to remove 33 nucleotides from the 3' end of rRNA and to degrade aberrant rRNAs; YbeY has in vitro RNase activity (Jacod, 2013). Four ribonucleases, Rnc, Rnr, Pnp and Rph, redundantly process 16S rRNA, and although this does not rule out a role for YbeY as co-ribonuclease with Rnr, the role of YbeY as being the nuclease activity responsible for the removal of the 33 nucleotides at the 3' end of 16S rRNA has been questioned (Sulthana, 2013). Structural homology analysis of YbeY indicates similarity to eukaryotic collagenase and gelatinase (Zhan, 2005). No collagenase, gelatinase or other hydrolase activity could be demonstrated for YbeY from A. aeolicus (Rasouly, 2009). The YbeY-bound metal is most likely nickel (Zhan, 2005). YbeY has been shown to be a heat shock protein and to be in the RpoH regulon (Nonaka, 2006; Rasouly, 2009). YbeY is induced during an unfolded protein response initiated with canavanine treatment (Rasouly, 2009). ybeY mutants accumulate 16S rRNA precursors (18S) and their mutant phenotypes are exacerbated by rnc, rnr and pnp mutations (Davies, 2010). UPF0054 family protein.	b0659
ybeZ	phoL	heat shock protein, putative NTPase; PhoH-like protein	Null	Heat shock protein, predicted ATPase; PhoH paralog, function unknown	ybeZ has been experimentally shown not to be part of the pho regulon (personal communication, B. Wanner, 2003). YbeZ has been shown to be a heat shock protein and to be in the RpoH regulon (Nonaka, 2006; Rasouly, 2009). YbeZ is induced during an unfolded protein response initiated with canavanine treatment (Rasouly, 2009). 9/334 YbeZ peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is not removed (Maillet, 2007).	b0660
miaB	yleA	tRNA-i(6)A37 methylthiotransferase	Enzyme; tRNA modification	tRNA-i(6)A37 methylthiotransferase; contains an iron-sulfur center, SAM-dependent	Radical SAM superfamily. rimO and miaB are paralogs. MiaB is required for methylthiolation step of the modified tRNA nucleoside N6-(4-hydroxyisopentenyl)-2-methylthioadenosine.	b0661
ubiF	yleB	2-octaprenyl-3-methyl-6-methoxy-1,4-benzoquinol oxygenase	Null	2-octaprenyl-3-methyl-6-methoxy-1,4-benzoquinol hydroxylase; produces 2-octaprenyl-3-methyl-5-hydroxy-6-methoxy-1,4-benzoquinol; required for ubiquinone synthesis; mutation confers resistance to bleomycin, phleomycin and heat	ubiI(visC), ubiH, ubiF and mhpA are paralogs.	b0662
chiP	ybfM	chitoporin, uptake of chitosugars	Null	Chitoporin, uptake of chitosugars; repressed by chiX(micM) sRNA	chiPQ(ybfMN) mRNA is regulated by ChiX(MicM) (Rasmussen, 2009). ChiX(MicM) sRNA is degraded after chb operon mRNA induction by chitobiose or chitotriose, mediated by a chiX(micM) antisense RNA in the chbBC intergenic region (Overgaard, 2009). ChiP(YbfM) has been characterized in Salmonella as a porin required for uptake of chitin-derived oligosaccharides regulated by the ChiX(MicM) sRNA (Figueroa-Bossi, 2009). ChiP(YbfM) is related to the PorD porin of P. aeruginosa. The first 32 aa of ChiP(YbfM) are a probable signal peptide. chiP(ybfM) and uidC are paralogs. ChiP is also the name of an OmpC-related chitoporin in Vibrio sp., so ChiP(YbfM) was named ChiP-III and was predicted to be a porin for chitobiose in Salmonella and E. coli (Yang, 2006).	b0681
chiQ	ybfN	chitosugar-induced verified lipoprotein	Null	Chitosugar-induced verified lipoprotein, function unknown	chiPQ(ybfMN) mRNA is regulated by ChiX(MicM) (Rasmussen, 2009). chiQ was named in Salmonella as it is the second gene in the chitosugar-regulated chiPQ operon; chiQ is not required for growth on chitosugars (Figueroa-Bossi, 2009). The first 16 aa of ChiQ are a type II signal peptide.	b0682
rhsO'	ybfO	pseudogene, Rhs family	Null	Pseudogene, Rhs family C-terminal fragment, rhsC-linked	Null	b0703
zitB	ybgR	zinc efflux system	Putative transport; Not classified	Zn(II) efflux transporter; zinc-inducible	Null	b0752
ybgS	None	putative periplasmic protein	Putative regulator; Not classified	Putative secreted protein, function unknown	ybgS is repressed during biofilm formation. The first 24 aa of YbgS are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. YbgS has been detected in lysates of three non K-12 strains in which the cleavage of the 24 aa signal peptide is confirmed by MS (Fagerquist, 2010). YbgS is described at various sources as a putative homeobox protein but this prediction could not be confirmed.	b0753
ybhH	None	putative PrpF family isomerase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Putative PrpF family isomerase, function unknown	Null	b0769
ybhI	None	putative DASS family tricarboxylate or dicarboxylate transporter	Orf; Not classified	Putative DASS family tri- or di-carboxylate transporter; inner membrane protein	IT (Ion Transporter) superfamily (Prakash, 2003). YbhI is amember of the ST(3) structural class based on hydropathy profiles (Lolkema, 2003). 	b0770
ybhJ	None	aconitase family protein	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Aconitase family protein, function unknown	Although a wildtype strain was unaffected, a ybhJ deletion mutant exhibited 25% survival after 20 minutes in 2.5 mM hydrogen peroxide (Kri Ko, 2014). Although YdhJ is an aconitase homolog, overexpression of cloned YdhJ does not increase cellular aconitase activity and ydhJ is not responsible for the 5% residual aconitase activity in acnAB double mutants; partially purified YdhJ has no aconitase activity with citrate or 2-methylcitrate, but does exhibit weak 2-methyl-cis-aconitate hydratase activity, although this could be due to a contaminating protein (Blank, 2002).	b0771
ybhK	None	putative CofD superfamily transferase	Putative structure; Not classified	Putative CofD superfamily transferase, function unknown; dimeric	E. coli YbhK partially complements a B. subtilis mgfK(yvcK) mutant; MgfK(YvcK) is required for morphogenesis via localization of PBP1 under gluconeogenic growth conditions, MgfK(YvcK) is organized as a helical cytoskeletal structure (Görke, 2005; Foulquier, 2011). Three global studies have identified YbhK as an FtsK-binding protein (Butland, 2005; Arifuzzaman, 2006; Hu, 2009). CofD proteins, 2-phospho-L-lactate transferases required for coenzyme F420 synthesis in methanogenic bacteria, and YcvK/YbhK proteins form two different clades of the CofD-YcvK superfamily; YcvK/YhbK proteins have altered substrate-binding pockets as compared to CofD but both sub-families may bind phosphate or phosphorylated substrates. The ybhK promoter region binds FNR and ArcA and ybhK expression is activated by ArcA (Federowicz, 2014).	b0780
ybhL	aceP	putative acetate transporter; BAX Inhibitor-1 family inner membrane protein	Null	Putative acetate uptake transporter; BAX Inhibitor-1 family inner membrane protein	YbhL is a putative pmf-dependent acetate uptake transporter; [14C]acetate uptake was inhibited by CCCP as well as cold acetate, serine, alpha-ketoglutarate, lactate, and succinate; ybhL plays a role in preventing E. coli cell death in the stationary phase of growth; ybhL has been tentatively assigned the gene name aceP (M. Inouye, personal communication). The BAX Inhibitor-1 (BI-1) family (previously called the TEGT or UPF0005 family) proteins are widely conserved; BI-1 has an anti-apoptotic function and forms a Ca(2+)-permeable channel; E. coli has three BI-1 family proteins: YccA, YbhM and YbhL (Hückelhoven, 2004; Bultynck, 2011).	b0786
ybhM	None	BAX Inhibitor-1 family inner membrane protein	Null	BAX Inhibitor-1 family inner membrane protein	ybhM is adjacent to and homologous to ybhL(aceP), which has been implicated in acetate transport; YbhLM may function together as an acetate transporter. The BAX Inhibitor-1 (BI-1) family (previously called the TEGT or UPF0005 family) proteins are widely conserved; BI-1 has an anti-apoptotic function and forms a Ca(2+)-permeable channel; E. coli has three BI-1 family proteins: YccA, YbhM and YbhL (Hückelhoven, 2004; Bultynck, 2011).	b0787
ybhN	None	UPF0104 family inner membrane protein	Null	UPF0104 family inner membrane protein	Null	b0788
clsB	ybhO	cardiolipin synthase 2	Enzyme; Macromolecule synthesis: Phospholipids	Cardiolipin synthase 2	Three paralogous cls genes encoding cardiolipin synthases, clsA(cls), clsB(ybhO) and clsC(ymdC), need to be deleted in order to prevent in vivo cardiolipin synthesis; most studies on the effects of cardiolipin depletion only used clsA(cls) mutant strains that still sythesize cardiolipin (Tan, 2012). ClsB(YbhO) cardiolipin synthase activity was detected in vitro but not in vivo; the physiological significance of in vitro activity was unclear at the time (Guo, 2000). Previous attempts to express ClsB activity in vivo used a low salt medium which inhibits ClsB actvity; cloned gene expression of ClsB in high salt medium resulted in cardiolipin synthesis (Tan, 2012).	b0789
ybhP	None	endo/exonuclease/phosphatase family protein	Null	Endo/exonuclease/phosphatase family protein, function unknown	Null	b0790
ybhQ	None	inner membrane protein	Null	Inner membrane protein, function unknown	Null	b0791
ybhR	None	putative ABC transporter permease	Null	Putative ABC transporter permease	The putative ybiHybhGFSR operon encodes a predicted transcriptional regulator (YbiH) and four proteins of a predicted ABC-type transporter complex YbhGFSR, containing two ABC permease family members (YbhSR), a predicted ATP-binding cassette protein (YbhF), and a predicted membrane fusion protein (YbhG) usually associated with RND-type efflux pumps. No predicted periplasmic binding protein is associated with this predicted ABC transporter YbhGFSR, suggesting that it is an exporter, which is consistent with the presence of a membrane fusion protein (YbhG) allowing for export transit across the periplasm. YbhG (f332) was mistakenly predicted to be a periplasmic binding protein, leading to the mis-classification of YbhGFSR as a putative importer (Linton, 1998). YadH, YbhR, YbhS, YhhJ, and the RbbA C-terminal domain are paralogous ABC2-membrane permease family members (pfam01061/COG0842).	b0792
ybhS	None	putative ABC transporter permease	Null	Putative ABC transporter permease	The putative ybiHybhGFSR operon encodes a predicted transcriptional regulator (YbiH) and four proteins of a predicted ABC-type transporter complex YbhGFSR, containing two ABC permease family members (YbhSR), a predicted ATP-binding cassette protein (YbhF), and a predicted membrane fusion protein (YbhG) usually associated with RND-type efflux pumps. No predicted periplasmic binding protein is associated with this predicted ABC transporter YbhGFSR, suggesting that it is an exporter, which is consistent with the presence of a membrane fusion protein (YbhG) allowing for export transit across the periplasm. YbhG (f332) was mistakenly predicted to be a periplasmic binding protein, leading to the mis-classification of YbhGFSR as a putative importer (Linton, 1998). YadH, YbhR, YbhS, YhhJ, and the RbbA C-terminal domain are paralogous ABC2-membrane permease family members (pfam01061/COG0842).	b0793
ybjG	bcrC	undecaprenyl pyrophosphate phosphatase	Null	Undecaprenyl pyrophosphate phosphatase; YbjG(UppP), minor activity	The ybjG gene is not essential, but UppP activity is essential to synthesize undecaprenyl phosphate, a C55 lipid carrier for cell wall synthesis, so a ybjG pgpB bacA triple mutant is lethal as all three have UppP activity; overexpression, but not wildtype levels, of the LpxT(YeiU) undecaprenyl pyrophosphate:lipid A 1-phosphate phosphotransferase activity rescues the triple mutant (El Ghachi, 2005). Like the phosphatidylglycerophosphatase PgpB, which also has a minor UppP activity, YbjG may have a preferred substrate other than undecaprenyl pyrophosphate in vivo. ybjG, pgpB, and lpxT are paralogs. Mg(2+) stimulon-PhoPQ regulon, EvgAS-PhoPQ cascade enhanced-expression subset. ybjG and bacA are not involved in lipid A modification (Touze, 2008).	b0841
ybjH	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Predicted periplasmic protein, function unknown	YbjH is predicted to have a 22 aa type I signal peptide.	b0843
ybjI	None	5-amino-6-(5-phospho-D-ribitylamino)uracil phosphatase; pyrimidine phosphatase; riboflavin synthesis	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Riboflavin	5-amino-6-(5-phospho-D-ribitylamino)uracil phosphatase; pyrimidine phosphatase; riboflavin synthesis	YbjI and YigB redundantly catalyze the fourth step in riboflavin synthesis; these enzymes have remained unknown for many years; other promiscuous HAD superfamily enzymes may also be able to perform this reaction (Haase, 2013). YbjI also has FMN and erythrose-4-P phosphatase activities in vitro (Kuznetsova, 2005; Kuznetsova, 2006). HAD superfamily, HAD15 family.	b0844
ybjJ	None	putative drug efflux MFS transporter, inner membrane protein	Putative regulator; Not classified	Putative drug efflux MFS transporter, function unknown; inner membrane protein	YbjJ is predicted to be a drug efflux transporter (Saidijam, 2006). YbjJ is a member of the Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS) of transporters.	b0845
rcdA	rcdR, ybjK	transcriptional regulator of csgD and ybiJI; autoregulator	Putative regulator; Not classified	Transcriptional regulator of csgD and ybiJI; autoregulator	TetR family. RcdA is a transcriptional activator for csgD, a transcriptional repressor for the divergent ybiJI operon, and a autoregulatory activator; additional verified direct targets in the RcdA regulon include sulA, asr, ydeI, and ycgF; some primary targets are themselves regulators and the indirect target csgB (regulated by CsgD) was verified by Northern blot; additional direct targets were identified by SELEX but not confirmed by Northern blot (Shimada, 2012). rcdA was referred to as rcdR in a subsequent publication from the same laboratory and even though this is probably a typographical error, rcdR is added as a synonm for rcdA to minimize confusion (Shimada, 2012; Shimada, 2013).	b0846
ybjL	None	putative transporter	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative AAE family transporter, function unknown	Predicted to be in the ST(3) structural class based on hydropathy profile (Lolkema, 2003), but is was not placed in the very similar IT superfamily in a study using phylogenetic methods (Prakash, 2003).	b0847
ybjM	None	inner membrane protein	Null	Inner membrane protein, function unknown	Null	b0848
ybjN	None	multicopy suppressor of coaA(Ts); ionizing radiation survival protein; putative chaperone; putative negative regulator of fimbriae and motility	Putative regulator; Not classified	Multicopy suppressor of coaA(Ts); ionizing radiation survival protein; putative chaperone; putative negative regulator of fimbriae and motility	A ybjN mutation is one of many selected in a strain evolved for resistance to high levels of ionizing radiation; a single ybjN deletion mutant has about a ten-fold drop in survival after radiation exposure as compared to a ybjN+ strain (Byrne, 2014). A ybjN mutant appears to be upregulated for fimbriae, flagella, motility, capsule and biofilm production; overproduction of YbjN slows growth, induces toxin-antitoxin modules, causes autoaggregation, reduces motility, reduces biofilm formation, increases acid sensitivity, down-regulates gadA, gadB and gadE, and down-regulates fimbriae production; ybjN is optimally expressed in exponential phase cells at 28C; the coa(Ts) mutant ts19 has 10-fold less ybjN mRNA than a coa+ strain which may be related to its ability to suppress coa(Ts) although a ybjN mutant is not itself temperature sensitive (Wang, 2011). Constitutive expression of cloned marA in a marR mutant increases ybjN transcription 3-fold (Barbosa, 2000). YbjN over-expression suppresses the temperature-sensitive growth phenotype of coa(Ts) mutants including ts19; YbjN may have chaperone-like properties (Chen, 2006). YbjN is the founding member of a superfamily (Pfam PF10722) that includes DR1245, a Deinococcus radiodurans protein that is a binding partner of the DNA damage response single-stranded DNA-binding protein DdrB; DdrB, but not DR1245, is upregulated after ionizing radiation and is required for survival after a high dose of ionizing radiation; mutants lacking DR1245, but not mutants lacking DdrB, have a slow growth phenotype; it was suggested that DR1245 might be a chaperone (Norais, 2013). YbjN family members identified using blastp are limited to the enterobacteria but YbjN superfamily members as identified with significant matches to Pfam PF10722 are more widespread; the YbjN superfamily is grouped into the same structural similarity clan (Pfam CL0097) as two type III secretion chaperone familes represented by Pfam PF07824 (SigE family) and PF05932 (CesT family) (Luo, 2001; Norais, 2013). YbjN(B0853) has been predicted to have thiol-disulfide oxidoreductase activity similar to that of the glutaredoxin/thioredoxin family (Fetrow, 1998). otherPDB(D. radiodurans):4H5B (Norais, 2013).	b0853
ybjO	None	DUF2593 family inner membrane protein	Null	Inner membrane protein, DUF2593 family, function unknown	Null	b0858
ybjP	None	lipoprotein	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Novel verified lipoprotein, function unknown	Overexpression causes abnormal biofilm architecture and reduced motility. First 18 aa are a type II signal peptide.	b0865
ybjQ	None	UPF0145 family protein	Null	Conserved protein, UPF0145 family, function unknown	Null	b0866
amiD	ybjR	1,6-anhydro-N-acetylmuramyl-L-alanine amidase, Zn-dependent; OM lipoprotein	Putative regulator; Not classified	1,6-anhydro-N-acetylmuramyl-L-alanine amidase, Zn-dependent; verified OM lipoprotein	AmiD also cleaves N-acetylmuramyl-L-alanine bonds in murein and muropeptides (Uehara, 2007). The first 16 aa of AmiD are a verified type II signal peptide (Juncker, 2003). AmpD and AmiD are homologous; AmpD has a unique C-terminal domain of unknown function.	b0867
ybjS	None	putative NAD(P)H-dependent oxidoreductase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Function unknown; predicted enzyme with a nucleoside diphosphate sugar substrate and an NAD(P) cofactor	Null	b0868
ybjT	None	putative NAD-dependent oxidoreductase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Predicted NAD-dependent oxidoreductase	YbjT is a predicted NAD-dependent reductase (PF13460) with a C-terminal DUF2867 family domain.	b0869
ltaE	ltaA, ybjU	L-allo-threonine aldolase, PLP-dependent	Putative enzyme; Not classified	L-allo-threonine aldolase	Three crystal structures of E. coli LtaE have been determined with and without substrates; these structures contain four amino acids differences as compared to the K-12 LtaE sequence: E158K, I239M, A256T and E318A (di Salvo, 2013).	b0870
hcr	ybjV	HCP oxidoreductase, NADH-dependent	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Hydrid-cluster protein oxidoreductase; FAD and [2Fe-2S] cofactors, NADH as electron donor	Hcp is in an operon and associated with its substrate, the Hcp hybrid-cluster protein hydroxylamine reductase.	b0872
hcp	ybjW	hybrid-cluster [4Fe-2S-2O] subunit of anaerobic terminal reductases	Orf; Not classified	Hydroxylamine reductase, hybrid-cluster [2Fe-2S] protein 	Hcp is in an operon and associated with the Hcr oxidoreductase. It is not known if Hcp is a physiologically relevant substrate but Hcp can degrade it in vivo. Hcp is also called fuscoredoxin or prismane protein. Hcp is expressed anaerobically with nitrate or nitrite as terminal electron acceptors and may be involved in metabolizing byproducts of nitrogen metabolism, which might include hydroxylamine. Alternatively is coudl be a catbolic enzyme for an exogeneous substrate, including hydroxylamine. Hcp is upregulated by GSNO in defined medium. FNR regulon.	b0873
ybjX	None	DUF535 family protein	Putative enzyme; Not classified	DUF535 family protein, function unknown; homologous to somA (S.t.) and virK (S.f.)	The ybjX homolog somA is an msbB(lpxM) suppressor mutation in Salmonella (Murray, 2001). The ybjX-macAB divergent promoter region binds ArcA and yjbX expression is activated by ArcA (Federowicz, 2014).	b0877
macA	ybjY	macrolide transporter membrane fusion protein (MFP) component	Putative membrane; Not classified	Membrane fusion protein (MFP) for macrolide efflux; subunit of ABC-type, TolC-dependent transporter MacAB; signal anchor; periplasmic	OmpF consistently co-purifies with MacA; MacA stimulates MacB ATPase activity (Tikhonova, 2007). The ybjX-macAB divergent promoter region binds ArcA and macAB expression is repressed by ArcA (Federowicz, 2014).	b0878
macB	ybjZ	macrolide ABC transporter peremase/ATPase	Putative transport; Not classified	ABC-type macrolide efflux transporter, with MacA and TolC	MacAB-TolC exports 14-15 membered lactone macrolides, e.g. erythromycin. MacA stimulates MacB ATPase activity (Tikhonova, 2007). The ybjX-macAB divergent promoter region binds ArcA and macAB expression is repressed by ArcA (Federowicz, 2014).	b0879
mdfA	cmlA, cmr	multidrug efflux system protein	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Other	Transmembrane multidrug efflux transporter; confers alkaline pH tolerence	Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS). The C-terminal domain is not required for the function of MdfA. MdfA(Cmr) may also be an arabinose efflux transporter because an mdfA(cmr) mutant has increased intracellular arabinose, but not xylose; other compounds were not tested (Koita, 2012). 	b0842
ycaM	None	putative transporter	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative transporter, function unknown	Null	b0899
ycaN	None	LysR family putative transcriptional regulator	Putative regulator; Not classified	Putative transcriptional regulator, function unknown	LysR family.	b0900
ycaO	None	ribosomal protein S12 methylthiotransferase accessory factor	Null	Ribosomal protein S12 methylthiotransferase accessory factor	YcaO is required for the efficient in vivo RimO-dependent beta-methylthiolation of ribosomal protein S12 (RpsL) on Asp-89 (Strader, 2011). Overexpression causes filamentous biofilm formation and reduced motility. The YcaO domain protein BalhD is the catalytic subunit of the ATP-dependent cyclodehydratase BalhCD from Bacillus sp. Al Hakam involved in thiazole/oxazole-modified microcin (TOMM) biosynthesis (Dunbar, 2012). Member of UPF0142 family. DUF181 protein.	b0905
ycaP	None	UPF0702 family putative inner membrane protein	Null	UPF0702 family predicted inner membrane protein, function unknown, UPF0702 	YcaP is predicted to have three N-terminal transmembrane domains. YcaP contains the DUF421 domain and belongs to the Pfam PF04239 family. YcaP and YdbD are grouped into paralogous gene group 289 at EcoCyc but they are likely to be unrelated: YcaP is a predicted membrane protein and YdbD is not; YcaP family proteins are much smaller than YdbD family proteins and they belong to different superfamilies.	b0906
ycaQ	None	DUF1006 family protein with C-terminal wHTH domain	Null	DUF1006 family protein, function unknown; C-terminal wHTH domain; predicted DNA-binding protein	The entire DUF1006 Pfam profile PF06224 has been renamed to HTH-42, which seems to indicate that most of the YcaQ protein (410 aa) is a wHTH domain, rather than just the C-terminal region previously suggested to have an HTH superfamily domain.	b0916
ycbJ	None	protein kinase-like domain protein	Null	Protein kinase-like domain protein, function unknown	YcbJ is a member of the InterPro protein kinase-like domain family (IPR011009).	b0919
ycbK	None	M15A protease-related family periplasmic protein	Null	Periplasmic M15A family non-protease, function unknown	Verified Tat substrate: YcbK has a Tat-only (Class II) predicted 30 aa signal peptide (Tullman-Ercek, 2007).	b0926
ycbL	None	putative metal-binding enzyme	Null	Glyoxalase II homolog, function unknown	Null	b0927
ssuC	ycbM	aliphatic sulfonate ABC transporter permease	Putative transport; Not classified	Aliphatic sulfonate ABC transporter permease; sulfur starvation inducible	Cbl regulon.	b0934
ssuD	ssi6, ycbN	alkanesulfonate monooxygenase, FMNH(2)-dependent	Null	FMNH2-dependent aliphatic sulfonate monooxygenase; sulfur starvation inducible	SsuD and SsuE form a stable complex and comprise a two-component alkanesulfonate monooxygenase system (Abdurachim, 2006). Cbl regulon.	b0935
ssuA	ycbO	aliphatic sulfonate ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein	Null	Aliphatic sulfonate ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein; sulfur starvation inducible	The first 21 aa of SsuA are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. Cbl regulon. tauA and ssuA are paralogs.	b0936
ssuE	ssi4, ycbP	NAD(P)H-dependent FMN reductase	Null	NADP(H):FMN oxidoreductase; sulfur starvation inducible	SsuD and SsuE form a stable complex and comprise a two-component alkanesulfonate monooxygenase system (Abdurachim, 2006). Cbl regulon.	b0937
elfA	ycbQ	laminin-binding fimbrin subunit	Structural component; Surface structures	Laminin-binding fimbrin subunit, FimA homolog	ElfA(YcbQ) has been characterized as a laminin-binding fimbrin subunit in E. coli O157:H7 strain EDL933; the ycbQRST operon has been renamed as the elfADCG operon (Samadder, 2009). In E. coli K-12 the elfADCG operon has three additional fimbrae-related genes, so the K-12 operon is predicted to have seven genes, elfADCG-ycbUVF, with two pilin genes (ycbUV) and a pilus chaperon gene (ycbF) at the end of the operon. ElfA is one of 25 FimA homologs in E. coli K-12. The first 21 aa of ElfA are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b0938
elfD	ycbR	putative periplasmic pilin chaperone	Putative factor; Surface structures	Putative periplasmic pilus chaperone, induced by AI-2 pheromone	YcbQ has been characterized as a laminin-binding fimbrin subunit in E. coli O157:H7 strain EDL933 and renamed as ElfA; ycbQ is in the ycbQRST operon, which has been renamed as the elfADCG operon (Samadder, 2009). Probable false positive lipoprotein prediction, Cys not conserved. The first 26 aa of ElfD constitute a predicted type I signal peptide. YcbR has Ig-like domains: pfam PF00345 aligns to N-terminal residues 31-149, and pfam PF02753 aligns to C-terminal residues 154-227.	b0939
elfC	ycbS	putative outer membrane fimbrial subunit export usher protein	Putative membrane; Outer membrane constituents	Putative outer membrane fimbrial subunit export usher protein	ElfA(YcbQ) has been characterized as a laminin-binding fimbrin subunit in E. coli O157:H7 strain EDL933; the ycbQRST operon has been renamed as the elfADCG operon (Samadder, 2009). ElfC is in the FimD family. The first 35 aa of ElfC are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b0940
elfG	ycbT	putative fimbrial-like adhesin protein	Putative structural component; Surface structures	FimA homolog, function unknown	ElfA(YcbQ) has been characterized as a laminin-binding fimbrin subunit in E. coli O157:H7 strain EDL933; the ycbQRST operon has been renamed as the elfADCG operon (Samadder, 2009). ElfG is one of 25 FimA homologs in E. coli K-12. The first 30 aa of ElfG are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b0941
ycbU	None	putative fimbriae protein	Putative structural component; Surface structures	FimA family protein	YcbU is one of 25 FimA homologs in E. coli K-12. The first 24 aa of YcbU are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b0942
ycbV	None	putative fimbrial-like adhesin protein	Putative structural component; Surface structures	FimA family protein	YcbV is one of 25 FimA homologs in E. coli K-12. The first 22 aa of YcbV are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b0943
zapC	ycbW	FtsZ stabilizer	Null	FtsZ stabilizer	ZapC binding promotes FtsZ polymer bundling (lateral interactions) and inhibits the GTPase activity of FtsZ (Hale, 2011; Durand-Heredia, 2011). Overexpression of ZapC causes filamentation and aberrant FtsZ filaments (Hale, 2011; Durand-Heredia, 2011). Divisome protein, non-essential. 	b0946
ycbX	None	6-N-hydroxylaminopurine detoxification oxidoreductase	Null	6-N-hydroxylaminopurine detoxification oxidoreductase; 2Fe-2S cluster	Molybdenum cofactor (MoCo), YcbX and YiiM are involved in the detoxification of 6-N-hydroxylaminopurine (HAP), which proceeds by a reduction to adenine (Kozmin, 2008). CysJ is a partner of the YcbX molybdoenzyme, probably functioning to provide the NADPH:flavin reductase activity needed for detoxification at the YcbX molybdocenter (Kozmin, 2010).	b0947
rlmL	rlmK, rlmKL, ycbY	23S rRNA m(2)G2445 and m(7)G2069 methyltransferases, SAM-dependent	Enzyme; rRNA modification	Fused 23S rRNA m(2)G2445 and m(7)G2069 methyltransferase; SAM-dependent	The N-terminal RlmL activity was enhanced by the C-terminal RlmK activity; RlmKL also has a unwinding activity for 23S rRNA helix 74 and RlmKL is required for efficient 50S subunit assembly in a deaD mutant (Kimura, 2012). rlmL is a non-essential gene co-transcribed with downstream uup gene. RlmL methyltransferase mutants have a disadvantage in competitve growth cultures with wild type (Lesnyk, 2006). RlmL(YcbY) is a ribosome-associated protein (Jiang, 2007).	b0948
ycbZ	None	putative peptidase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	S16 peptidase family protein	Null	b0955
pqiC	ymbA	DUF330 family putative lipoprotein	Null	Paraquat-inducible DUF330 family predicted lipoprotein; SoxRS-regulated; RpoS regulon; function unknown	The pqiABC operon P1 promoter is paraquat-inducible (superoxide generator-inducible) and SoxRS-regulated; P2 is RpoS-regulated (Koh, 1995; Kim, 2005; Ito, 2008). The first 15 aa of (PqiC)YmbA are predicted to be a type II signal peptide.	b0952
sxy	tfoX, yccR	CRP-S-dependent promoter expression factor	Null	Required for expression of CRP-S-dependent promoters	CRP-S are specialized CRP-dependent promoters that also require the Sxy gene product for expression (Cameron, 2006; Sinha, 2009).	b0959
yccS	None	putative transporter, FUSC superfamily inner membrane protein	Null	Putative transporter, FUSC superfamily inner membrane protein, tandem domains	Null	b0960
yccT	None	UPF0319 family protein	Null	UPF0319 family protein	yccT was identified sa a multicopy suppressor of a ppc deletion strain (Patrick, 2007). The first 20 aa are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. DUF2057 family.	b0964
yccU	None	putative CoA-binding protein	Null	Oleic-acid induced protein	YccU is predicted to have a CoA-binding site.	b0965
hspQ	yccV	heat shock protein involved in degradation of mutant DnaA; hemimethylated oriC DNA-binding protein	Null	Heat shock protein involved in degradation of mutant DnaA; hemimethylated oriC DNA-binding protein; mutation suppresses some dnaA(Ts)	A mutation in hspQ allows some dnaA(Ts) strains to grow at 40C, and slows the degradation of DnaA508 at 40C. Despite forcing translation at the upstream start, some HspQ(YccV) protein likely initiating at this true start site was observed by d'Alencon et al. (2003). Binding to hemimethylated oriC is specific, but weak, possibly due to the extra 17 N-terminal residues on the purified HspQ(YccV). RpoH regulon.	b0966
rlmI	yccW	23S rRNA m(5)C1962 methyltransferase, SAM-dependent	Enzyme; rRNA modification	23S rRNA m(5)C1962 methyltransferase, SAM-dependent	5/58 RlmI peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon (Maillet, 2007).	b0967
yccX	None	weak acylphosphatase	Null	Acylphosphatase, weak activity	YccX is a weak acylphosphatase (Ramazzotti, 2006). Although a wildtype strain was unaffected, a yccX deletion mutant exhibited 50% survival after 100 minutes at 56C (Kri Ko, 2014).	b0968
etp	yccY	O-antigen capsule forming protein-tyrosine-phosphatase; Etk-P dephosphorylase	Enzyme; Not classified	Protein-tyrosine-phosphatase, required for O-antigen capsule formation; dephosphorylates Etk-P	E. coli K-12 Etk is de-phosphorylated by the Etp phosphatase in vitro (Vincent, 2000). E. coli K-12 does not produce O-antigen capsule polysaccharide because the cryptic gfcABCDE-etp-etk operon is silenced by IS1D in the promoter region (Peleg, 2005). Etp is required for O-antigen capsule formation in enteropathogenic E. coli (EPEC) (Peleg, 2005). Etp Y121 is phosphorylated by an unknown kinase, not Etk or Wzc, and can autodephosphorylate in vitro (Nadler, 2012). etp and wzb are paralogs. Etp can dephosphorylates Wzc-P and Wzb-P in vitro (Vincent, 2000). Etp belongs to the low molecular weight phosphotyrosine protein phosphatase (LMWPc) family (Pfam PF01451).	b0982
gfcE	yccZ	putative O-antigen capsule outer membrane auxillary protein export channel	Transport; Not classified	Probable OMA family export channel; required to make O-antigen capsule; outer membrane auxillary lipoprotein	E. coli K-12 does not produce O-antigen capsule polysaccharide because the cryptic gfcABCDE-etp-etk operon is silenced by IS1D in the promoter region (Peleg, 2005). GfcE is required for O-antigen capsule formation in enteropathogenic (EPEC) E. coli strain O127:H6 and probably forms an OMA family polysaccharide export channel (Paulsen, 1997; Peleg, 2005). gfcE(yccZ) and wza are paralogs. GfcE structure and function is inferred by analogy with the Wza function translocating group 1 K30 capsular polysaccharide in E. coli E69 (O9a:K30) (Drummelsmith, 2000; Nesper, 2003; Beis, 2004; Reid, 2005; Dong, 2006). Since the outer membrane protein Wza interacts with the periplasmic domain of Wzc it is likely that GfcE associates with the Wzc paralog Etk (Nadler, 2012). The first 20 aa of GfcE are a type II signal peptide. otherPDB(E. coli K30): 2J58 (Dong, 2006). otherPDB(E. coli K30): 2W8H, 2W8I (Hagelueken, 2009).	b0983
gfcD	ymcA	putative O-antigen capsule production periplasmic protein	Null	Predicted periplasmic protein; required to make O-antigen capsule	E. coli K-12 does not produce O-antigen capsule polysaccharide because the cryptic gfcABCDE-etp-etk operon is silenced by IS1D in the promoter region (Peleg, 2005). GfcD is required for O-antigen capsule formation in enteropathogenic E. coli (EPEC) (Peleg, 2005). gfcD(ymcA) and yjbH are paralogs. GfcD has both type I (21 aa) and (slightly better) type II (18 aa) signal peptide predictions by SignalP/LipoP. GfcD is not likely to be a lipoprotein because the lipobox Cys is poorly conserved; many GfcD homologs that lack the essential lipidated Cys are nonetheless annotated as putative lipoproteins.	b0984
gfcC	ymcB	putative O-antigen capsule production periplasmic protein	Null	Predicted periplasmic protein; required to make O-antigen capsule	E. coli K-12 does not produce O-antigen capsule polysaccharide because the cryptic gfcABCDE-etp-etk operon is silenced by IS1D in the promoter region (Peleg, 2005). GfcC is required for O-antigen capsule formation in enteropathogenic E. coli (EPEC) (Peleg, 2005). yjbG and gfcC(ymcB) are paralogs. The first 22 aa of GfcC are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. Although the crystal structure of E. coli GfcC is from strain O127:H6, it has only four mismatches as compared to the K-12 GfcC (Sathiyamoorthy, 2011).	b0985
gfcB	ymcC	O-antigen capsule production lipoprotein	Putative regulator; Not classified	Lipoprotein required to make O-antigen capsule; predicted outer membrane location	E. coli K-12 does not produce O-antigen capsule polysaccharide because the cryptic gfcABCDE-etp-etk operon is silenced by IS1D in the promoter region (Peleg, 2005). GfcB is required for O-antigen capsule formation in enteropathogenic E. coli (EPEC) (Peleg, 2005). gfcB(ymcC) and yjbF are paralogs. The first 15 aa of GfcB are a type II signal peptide.	b0986
gfcA	ymcD	O-antigen capsule production threonine-rich inner membrane protein	Null	Threonine-rich inner membrane protein; required to make O-antigen capsule	E. coli K-12 does not produce O-antigen capsule polysaccharide because the cryptic gfcABCDE-etp-etk operon is silenced by IS1D in the promoter region (Peleg, 2005). GfcA is required for O-antigen capsule formation in enteropathogenic E. coli (EPEC) (Peleg, 2005). GfcA is an inner membrane protein with a periplasmic C-tail (Daley, 2005). gfcA(ymcD) and yjbE are paralogs. The first 21 aa of GfcA are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b0987
ydbL	None	DUF1318 family protein	Null	DUF1318 family protein	The first 21 aa of YdbL are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b1383
paaZ	maoC, tynP?, ydbN	oxepin-CoA hydrolase and 3-oxo-5,6-dehydrosuberyl-CoA semialdehyde dehydrogenase	Enzyme; Phenylacetic acid degradation	Oxepin-CoA hydrolase/3-oxo-5,6-dehydrosuberyl-CoA semialdehyde dehydrogenase; enoyl-CoA hydratase; mutants are unable to use phenylacetate as a carbon source	PaaZ is a bifunctional enzyme converting oxepin-CoA to 3-oxo-5,6-dehydrosuberyl-CoA in two steps via the open chain aldehyde intermediate (Teufel, 2010). PaaZ(MaoC) is involved in supplying (R)-3-hydroxyacyl-CoA from the beta-oxidation pathway to the PHA biosynthetic pathway, in fadB mutants. PaaZ(MaoC) has activity toward crotonyl-CoA.	b1387
paaA	ydbO	ring 1,2-phenylacetyl-CoA epoxidase subunit	Enzyme; Phenylacetic acid degradation	Ring 1,2-phenylacetyl-CoA epoxidase subunit; phenylacetyl-CoA oxygenase, alpha subunit; heteromultimeric diiron oxygenase component; phenylacetic acid degradation	PaaABCDE is a multi-subunit oxygenase that hydroxylates phenylacetyl-CoA. PaaABCE is purified without PaaD and added PaaD is not required for the formation of ring 1,2-epoxy-phentylacetate-CoA by the PaaABCE monooxygenease (Teufel, 2010).	b1388
paaC	ydbP	ring 1,2-phenylacetyl-CoA epoxidase subunit	Enzyme; Phenylacetic acid degradation	Ring 1,2-phenylacetyl-CoA epoxidase subunit; phenylacetyl-CoA oxygenase, beta subunit; heteromultimeric diiron oxygenase component; phenylacetic acid degradation	PaaABCDE is a multi-subunit oxygenase that hydroxylates phenylacetyl-CoA. PaaABCE is purified without PaaD and added PaaD is not required for the formation of ring 1,2-epoxy-phentylacetate-CoA by the PaaABCE monooxygenease (Teufel, 2010).	b1390
paaD	ydbQ	ring 1,2-phenylacetyl-CoA epoxidase subunit	Enzyme; Phenylacetic acid degradation	Ring 1,2-phenylacetyl-CoA epoxidase possible subunit; phenylacetyl-CoA oxygenase, gamma subunit; heteromultimeric diiron oxygenase component; phenylacetic acid degradation	PaaABCDE is a multi-subunit oxygenase that hydroxylates phenylacetyl-CoA. PaaABCE is purified without PaaD and added PaaD is not required for the formation of ring 1,2-epoxy-phentylacetate-CoA by the PaaABCE monooxygenease (Teufel, 2010).	b1391
paaE	ydbR	ring 1,2-phenylacetyl-CoA epoxidase, NAD(P)H oxidoreductase component	Enzyme; Phenylacetic acid degradation	Ring 1,2-phenylacetyl-CoA epoxidase subunit; phenylacetyl-CoA oxygenase, NAD(P)H oxidoreductase component; phenylacetic acid degradation	PaaABCDE is a multi-subunit oxygenase that hydroxylates phenylacetyl-CoA. PaaABCE is purified without PaaD and added PaaD is not required for the formation of ring 1,2-epoxy-phentylacetate-CoA by the PaaABCE monooxygenease (Teufel, 2010).	b1392
paaF	ydbR	2,3-dehydroadipyl-CoA hydratase	Enzyme; Phenylacetic acid degradation	2,3-dehydroadipyl-CoA hydratase; enoyl-CoA hydratase; phenylacetic acid degradation	paaF mutants accumulate delta3-dehydroadipate and are unable to use phenylacetate as a carbon source.	b1393
paaG	ydbT	1,2-epoxyphenylacetyl-CoA isomerase, oxepin-CoA-forming	Enzyme; Phenylacetic acid degradation	1,2-epoxyphenylacetyl-CoA isomerase, oxepin-CoA-forming; phenylacetic acid degradation	paaG mutants accumulate ring-1,2-dihydroxy-1,2-dihydrophenylacetyl lactone and are unable to use phenylacetate as a carbon source.	b1394
paaH	ydbU	3-hydroxyadipyl-CoA dehydrogenase, NAD+-dependent	Enzyme; Phenylacetic acid degradation	3-hydroxyadipyl-CoA dehydrogenase, NAD+-dependent; phenylacetic acid degradation	paaH mutants accumulate 3-hydroxyadipate and are unable to use phenylacetate as a carbon source.	b1395
paaI	ydbV	hydroxyphenylacetyl-CoA thioesterase	Enzyme; Phenylacetic acid degradation	Hydroxyphenylacetyl-CoA thioesterase; phenylacetate degradation	PaaI is a member of the HotDog superfamily of thioesterases and dehydratases (Pfam CL0050, PF03061; PDB 2FS2) (Dillon, 2004; Song, 2006).	b1396
paaJ	ydbW	3-oxoadipyl-CoA/3-oxo-5,6-dehydrosuberyl-CoA thiolase	Enzyme; Phenylacetic acid degradation	3-oxoadipyl-CoA/3-oxo-5,6-dehydrosuberyl-CoA thiolase; phenylacetic acid degradation	paaJ mutants are unable to use phenylacetate as a carbon source.	b1397
paaK	None	phenylacetyl-CoA ligase	Enzyme; Phenylacetic acid degradation	Phenylacetate-coenzyme A ligase, phenylacetic acid degradation	Null	b1398
paaX	ydbY	transcriptional repressor of phenylacetic acid degradation paa operon, phenylacetyl-CoA inducer	Regualtor: Phenylacetic acid degradation	Repressor for the paa operon, phenylacetyl-CoA induced	Null	b1399
paaY	ydbZ	thioesterase required for phenylacetic acid degradation; trimeric; phenylacetate regulatory and detoxification protein; hexapeptide repeat protein	Enzyme; Phenylacetic acid degradation	Thioesterase required for phenylacetic acid degradation; trimeric; phenylacetate regulatory and detoxification protein; hexapeptide repeat protein	PaaY contains hexapeptide repeats.	b1400
ynbA	None	inner membrane protein	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Phosphatidylglycerophosphate synthase homolog, function unknown; inner membrane protein	Null	b1408
ynbB	None	putative CDP-diglyceride synthase	Putative enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Nucleotide interconversions	CDP-diglyceride synthase homolog, function unknown; predicted inner membrane protein	Null	b1409
ynbC	None	putative esterase	Null	Predicted bifunctional lysophospholipase and SAM methyltransferase, function unknown	Overexpression causes filamentous biofilm formation and non-motility.	b1410
ynbD	None	putative phosphatase inner membrane protein	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Predicted phospholipid or protein phosphatase; predicted inner membrane protein	Homologous to the 	b1411
ydcI	None	putative DNA-binding transcriptional regulator	Putative regulator; Not classified	Putative transcriptional regulator	YdcI is a LysR family predicted HTH transcriptional regulator.	b1422
ydcJ	None	putative metalloenzyme	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Putative metalloenzyme	Although the PDB structure 2RJB (containing zinc) is from Shigella flexneri (all Shigella are actually E. coli strains) it only differs from the K-12 protein sequence by one residue (S193L). YdcJ belongs to COG5383 and to the DUF1338 superfamily. Structural neighboring using VAST and DALI show that YdcJ is also a member of the SCOP Glyoxalase/Bleomycin resistance protein/Dihydroxybiphenyl dioxygenase superfamily, indicating that the NCBI DUF1338 superfamily c102226 should be added to the NCBI Glyoxalase/Bleomycin resistance protein/Dioxygenase superfamily cl00411. The closest structure neighbor to YdcJ (DALI Z score = 22.5) is the uncharacterized Ralstonia eutropha protein JMP134 (PDB:3IUZ), which is not a DUF1338 member. YdcJ has two COG5383 domains, a full length domain at the N-terminus and a truncated domain at the C-terminus.	b1423
ydcK	None	uncharacterized protein	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Function unknown	Null	b1428
ydcL	None	lipoprotein	Null	Novel verified lipoprotein	The first 20 aa of YdcL are a type II signal peptide.	b1431
insQ	orf2, orfB, tnpB, ydcM	IS609 transposase B	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS609 transposase B	InsQ(YdcM) belongs to the COG0675/pfam01385 (Transposase_2) family of transposases.	b1432
ydcN	None	putative DNA-binding transcriptional regulator	Putative regulator; Not classified	Predicted transcriptional regulator	YdcN has an N-terminal HTH predicted DNA-binding domain (HTH_CROC1/HTH_XRE family) and a C-terminal RmlC-type Cupin_2 (jellyroll) conserved barrel domain. The HTH domain of YdcN matches PRK08154 (E=6e-06), a reviewed multi-domain profile in NCBI's Protein Clusters database named "anaerobic benzoate catabolism transcriptional regulator" and although the YdcN C-terminal Cupin-2 domain does not match PRK08154, YdcN may be the transcriptional regulator for the adjacent divergent ydcO gene, encoding a predicted permease similar to benzoate transporters (Klimke, 2009).	b1434
ydcO	None	BenE family inner membrane putative transporter	Putative transport; Not classified	BenE family inner membrane predicted transporter; function unknown	YdcO belongs to the benzoate membrane transport protein family of predicted transporters and its substrate may be benzoate or similar molecules (Pfam PF03594). YdcO has been demonstrated to be an inner membrane protein with its C-terminus in the cytoplasm (Daley, 2005).	b1433
ydcP	None	putative peptidase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	U32 peptidase family protein	ydcP, yegQ, yhbU, and yhbV are paralogs.	b1435
hicB	ydcQ	antitoxin for the HicAB toxin-antitoxin system	Null	Antitoxin of HicAB TA pair; mutational suppressor of null rpoE lethality	IS insertions in hicA(ydcQ) were isolated as suppressors of rpoE lethality; in wildtype cells, hicA(ydcQ) mutants downregulate extracytoplasmic stress responses and OM vesicle production is reduced (Button, 2006). PF01381 family. A longer 145 aa translation is unlikely due to a poor RBS and a lack of sequence conservation.	b1438
ydcR	None	putative DNA-binding transcriptional regulator and putative aminotransferase	Putative regulator; Not classified	Putative HTH transcriptional regulator with aminotransferase domain; MocR family	Null	b1439
ydcS	None	putative ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein	Enzyme; Not classified	Putative ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein; possible unusual polyhydroxybutyrate (PHB) synthase; upregulated during glucose-limitation	YdcS was purified and characterized as a PHB synthase, however most PHB remains so there must be another synthase (Dai, 2008). E. coli makes a short-chain poly-(R)-3-hydroxybutyrate (cPHB), called cPHB, of about 140 units that is complexed with polyphosphate and makes a membrane channel (Das, 1997; Reusch, 1999). About 5% of all E. coli proteins, e.g. Hns and OmpA, are conjugated with cPHB (Huang, 1996; Reusch, 2002; Xian, 2007). Putative YdcVUTS ABC transport system. YdcS was initially as an expressed protein identified using 2-D gels and mass spectrometry. The first 22 aa of YcdS are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. RpoS regulon.	b1440
ydcT	None	putative ABC transporter ATPase	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative ABC transporter ATPase	Putative YdcVUTS ABC transport system. potA and ydcT are paralogs.	b1441
ydcU	None	putative ABC transporter permease	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative spermidine/putrescine transporter subunit	Putative YdcVUTS ABC transport system. ydcU, potB and potH are paralogs.	b1442
ydcV	None	putative ABC transporter permease	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative ABC transporter permease	Putative YdcVUTS ABC transport system. ydcV, potC and potI are paralogs.	b1443
patD	prr, ydcW	gamma-aminobutyraldehyde dehydrogenase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Gamma-aminobutyraldehyde dehydrogenase, NAD-dependent; ABALDH; ABDH; pyrroline dehydrogenase; also active on medium chain aldehydes	PatD(YdcW) is the Prr gamma-aminobutyraldehyde dehydrogenase; PatA(YgjG) couped with PatD(YdcW) convert putrescine to gamma-aminobutyric acid in addition to the Puu pathway (Reitzer, 2003; Samsonova, 2005). PatD and PuuC account for 55% and 30%, respectively, of the cellular gamma-Aminobutyraldehyde dehydrogenase activity (Schneider, 2012). Repressed during biofilm formation.	b1444
ydcX	None	DUF2566 family protein	Null	DUF2566 family protein; required for swarming phenotype	YdcX has been reported to be required for swarming (Inoue, 2007). The yncL-ydcXY divergent operon promoter region binds FNR and ydcXY operon expression is activated by FNR (Federowicz, 2014).	b1445
ydcY	None	DUF2526 family protein	Null	DUF2526 family protein	The yncL-ydcXY divergent operon promoter region binds FNR and ydcXY operon expression is activated by FNR (Federowicz, 2014).	b1446
ydcZ	None	DUF606 family inner membrane protein	Null	Required for swarming phenotype, inner membrane protein, function unknown	An evolutionary analysis of the DUF606 family includes YdcZ (Lolkema, 2008). YdcZ has been classified as a member of the DMT superfamily of transporters at TCDB. YdcZ has been reported to be required for swarming (Inoue, 2007).	b1447
mnaT	yncA	methionine N-acyltransferase; L-amino acid N-acyltransferase	Enzyme; Proteins - translation and modification	Methionine N-acyltransferase; L-amino acid N-acyltransferase	MnaT(YncA) catalyzes the N-acylation of free L-amino acids, primarily methionine and methionine derivatives (Production of N-acylated sulphur-containing amino acids with microorganisms having enhanced N-acyltransferase enzymatic activity, Figge R., Barbier G., Bestel-Corre G., Patent number <A HREF="http://www.freepatentsonline.com/20100047880.pdf" target="v">US0047880</A>, 22-AUG-2008).	b1448
curA	yncB	curcumin/dihydrocurcumin reductase, NADPH-dependent	Enzyme; Not classified	Curcumin/dihydrocurcumin reductase, NADPH-dependent	Curcumin is a yellow pigment derived from a plant rhizome and is used theraputically; dimeric CurA converts curcumin to dihydrocurcumin and then dihydrocurcumin; CurA reduced resveratrol at 15% the rate of curcumin reduction (Hassaninasab, 2011).	b1449
mcbR	yncC	colanic acid and biofilm gene transcriptional regulator, MqsR-controlled	Putative regulator; Not classified	MqsR-controlled colanic acid and biofilm regulator; represses mcbA	yciGFE is transcribed using RpoS and is silenced by H-NS and the H-NS silencing is reversed by transcription factor McbR(YncC) (Beraud, 2010). McbR can be modified by lysine acetylation in vitro using purified E. coli Pka(YfiQ) (Thao, 2010). The Salmonella McbR(yncC) ortholog is regulated by RpoS.	b1450
yncD	None	putative iron outer membrane transporter	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative TonB-dependent outer membrane receptor	ArcA binds in the yncE-yncD divergent promoter region and ArcA represses yncE and yncD expression (Federowicz, 2014). yncD and fhuA are paralogs.	b1451
yncE	None	ATP-binding protein, periplasmic, function unknown	Putative factor; Not classified	DNA-binding, ATP-binding periplasmic protein, function unknown	The first 30 aa of YncE are a type I signal peptide. yncE is repressed by Fe(2+)-Fur (McHugh, 2003). ATP-binding stabilizes YncE (Liu, 2011). YncE is a SecB-dependent secreted periplasmic protein that accumulates in the cytoplasm as an uncleaved precursor in a secB mutant (Baars, 2006). The beta-propellar structure of YncE may have led to a false prediction of YncE as a beta-barrel outer membrane protein (Zhai, 2002). YncE has a seven-bladed beta-propellar structure; YncE binds ssDNA better than dsDNA (Kagawa, 2011). Other beta-propellar WD40 repeat proteins include heme-binding oxidoreductases which may have led to a unsupported prediction that YncE is an oxidoreductase. YncE binds ATP and ssDNA, both of which are in short supply in the periplasm, making a functional prediction difficult; YncE has been suggested to be involved in iron transport since yncE is adjacent to the fhuA paralog yncD; perhaps YncE is a periplasmic binding protein facilitating the uptake of a novel iron ferrichrome that resembles ATP and ssDNA and that the binding of ATP and ssDNA is not physiologically relavent. ArcA binds in the yncE-yncD divergent promoter region and ArcA represses yncE and yncD expression (Federowicz, 2014).	b1452
ansP	yncF	L-asparagine transporter	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Amino acids, amines	L-asparagine permease	Null	b1453
yncG	None	glutathione S-transferase homolog	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Glutathione S-transferase homolog, function unknown	Null	b1454
yncH	None	IPR020099 family protein	Null	IPR020099 family protein required for swarming, function unknown	YncH is the prototype for a family of proteins with unknown functions (InterPro IPR020099). yncH is required for swarming motility (Inoue, 2007).	b1455
yddH	None	flavin reductase like-protein	Null	Flavin reductase like-protein, function unknown	YddH is a member of a family of predicted FMN-binding flavin reductase-like proteins (Pfam PF01613). 	b1462
nhoA	yddI	N-hydroxyarylamine O-acetyltransferase	Null	N-hydroxyarylamine O-acetyltransferase	NhoA is acetylated at Lys214 and at the C-terminal Lys281; NhoA is deacetylated by CobB, acetylation and deacytylation affects NhoA activity (Zhang, 2013). 7/82 NhoA peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is not removed (Maillet, 2007).	b1463
yddK'	yddJ	pseudogene, leucine-rich protein	Null	Pseudogene, frameshifted, leucine-rich protein	The YddK' protein sequence presented is a hypothetical frameshift reconstruction fusing the previously annotated yddJ' pseudogene to the 5' end of yddK'. An intact allele of YddK' is EcE24377A_1651 from E. coli O139:H28 (strain E24377A / ETEC) (UniProtKB A7ZLR3). Numerous 443 aa alleles of YddK can be found, but other allelic variations in length suggest that the E. coli yddK alleles easily acquire mutations.	b1471
yddL'	None	putative lipoprotein	Putative membrane; Not classified	Pseudogene, OmpCFN porin family, N-terminal fragment	The first 21 aa are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. An intact allele is found in O157:H7 as Z2239 (UniProtKB: Q8XAS0). A deletion has apparently removed the 3' 273 codons of yddL.	b1472
yddM	None	putative DNA-binding transcriptional regulator	Null	Predicted transcriptional regulator, function unknown	PF01381 family. The crystal structure of E. coli CFT073 YddM has been determined (PDB 2ICP AND 2ICT) but it is identical (94/94) to the YddM sequence of MG1655; the YddM structure is misidentified as the structure of the related paralog HigA antitoxin (Arbing, 2010).	b1477
ddpF	yddO	D,D-dipeptide ABC transporter ATPase	Putative transport; Not classified	D,D-dipeptide ABC transporter ATPase	RpoS regulon.	b1483
ddpD	yddP	D,D-dipeptide ABC transporter ATPase	Putative transport; Not classified	D,D-dipeptide ABC transporter ATPase	RpoS regulon.	b1484
ddpC	yddQ	D,D-dipeptide ABC transporter permease	Putative transport; Not classified	D,D-dipeptide ABC transporter permease	Topology mapped using protein fusions. RpoS regulon.	b1485
ddpB	yddR	D,D-dipeptide ABC transporter permease	Putative transport; Not classified	D,D-dipeptide ABC transporter permease	RpoS regulon.	b1486
ddpA	yddS	D,D-dipeptide ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein	Putative factor; Not classified	D,D-dipeptide ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein	The first 25 aa of dppA are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. RpoS regulon.	b1487
ddpX	vanX, yddT	D-ala-D-ala dipeptidase, Zn-dependent	Null	D-Ala-D-Ala dipeptidase	RpoS regulon.	b1488
dosP	dos, yddU	oxygen sensor, c-di-GMP phosphodiesterase, heme-regulated; cold- and stationary phase-induced bioflim regulator	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Heme-regulated oxygen sensor, c-di-GMP phosphodiesterase; biofilm regulator; may have weak cAMP PDE activity; cold- and stationary phase-inducible; dimeric; dual domain protein; defective cyclase domain	DosCP regulates biofilm formation through the oxygen-dependent activation of the csgBAC operon (Tagliabue, 2010a). DosCP may constitute a cyclic-di-GMP synthesis/degradation module (Mendez-Ortiz, 2006; Tuckerman, 2009). Dos has been renamed as DosP (Tuckerman, 2009). The EAL domain of DosP has been shown to be a c-di-GMP-specific phosphodiesterase and does not have significant cAMP phosphodiesterase activity, in contrast to an earlier report (Sasakura, 2002; Schmidt, 2005). cAMP hydrolysis by full length DosP found by Sasakura (2002) is three orders of magnitude slower than the rate of c-di-GMP hydrolysis, may not be physiologically relevant, and may be due to the use of 2'-O-anthraniloyl-cAMP instead of cAMP as substrate (Schmidt, 2005). Contrary to previous reports of a DosP tetramer (based on gel filtration), full-length DosP is a dimer in solution (Lechauve, 2009). Redox changes in the bound heme result in global 3D structural alterations; this "scissor-type" subunit movement aids in catalytic control. DosP contains 2 N-terminal heme binding PAS domains, a central defective GGDEF domain, and a C-terminal EAL domain. The start codon might be 8 codons upstream. dosP expression is elevated under aerobic conditions where it is partially responsible for cAMP degradation. The heme binding domain has been referred to as DosH. Asp40 of DosP is involved in the electronic structure of the haem iron and redox-dependent catalytic control of the PDE domain because mutations in Asp40 result in lack of catalytic activity. A dosP mutant is reported to have elevated cAMP under aerobic conditions, but this may be an indirect effect or it may reflect a physiologically relevant cAMP PDE activity in vivo. dosCP is an operon and DosCP is a protein complex (Tuckerman, 2009). 	b1489
dosC	yddV	diguanylate cyclase, cold- and stationary phase-induced oxygen-dependent biofilm regulator	Null	Diguanylate cyclase, binds oxygen, positive biofilm regulator; cold- and stationary phase-induced	DosCP regulates biofilm formation through the oxygen-dependent activation of the csgBAC operon (Tagliabue, 2010a). DosCP may constitute a cyclic-di-GMP synthesis/degradation module (Mendez-Ortiz, 2006; Tuckerman, 2009). Overexpression of DosC(YddV), but not other DGCs, up-regulates the pgaABCD operon and biofilm formation independently of CsrA, and a dosC(yddV) mutant has reduced pgaABCD expression (Tagliabue, 2010b). Overexpressed DosC(YddV) complements R. leguminosarum celR mutants to produce cellulose and enhances cellulose production in A. tumefaciens. DosC(YddV) can complement Salmonella adrA. DosC(YddV) has an N-terminal GCSD(Globin-Coupled-Sensor Domain) that binds oxygen (Tuckerman, 2009). DosC(YddV) has a C-terminal diguanylate cyclase GGDEF domain. dosCP is an operon and DosCP is a protein complex (Tuckerman, 2009). DosC(YddV) has been mislabeled as YhcK, the name of a B. subtilis homolog of YedQ. RpoS regulon (Weber, 2006).	b1490
yddW	None	liprotein, glycosyl hydrolase homolog	Null	Novel verified lipoprotein, function unknown; related to glycosyl hydrolases	The first 27 aa of YddW are a type II signal peptide.	b1491
ydeM	None	putative YdeN-specific sulfatase-maturating enzyme	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Predicted YdeN-specific anaerobic sulfatase-maturating enzyme; Radical SAM enzyme	YdeM is predicted to be the anaerobic sulfatase-maturating enzyme (anSME) responsible for the conversion of Ser132 to Calpha-formylglycine (FGly), also known as 3-oxoalanine, in the predicted periplasmic sulfatase YdeM (Berteau, 2006). E. coli K-12 cells exhibit mucin-desulfating sulfatase activity but not arylsulfatase activity (Jansen, 1999). anSMEs are also known as Radical SAM superfamily sulfatase-maturases.	b1497
ydeN	None	putative Ser-type periplasmic non-aryl sulfatase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Predicted periplasmic non-aryl sulfatase, Ser-type; possible periplasmic mucin-desulfating sulfatase	E. coli K-12 cells exhibit mucin-desulfating sulfatase activity but not arylsulfatase activity (Yamada, 1978; Jansen, 1999). It is not known if one or both of the predicted periplasmic sulfatases AslA and YdeN are responsible for the observed mucin-desulfating sulfatase activity, but it is possible. YdeM is predicted to be the anaerobic sulfatase-maturating enzyme converting Ser132 to 3-oxoalanine in YdeN. 3-oxoalanine is also known as Calpha-formylglycine (FGly). The first 20 aa of YdeN are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b1498
ydeO	None	UV-inducible global regulator, EvgA-, GadE-dependent	Regulator; Not classified	UV-inducible global regulator, EvgA-, GadE-dependent; transcriptional activator for mdtEF; required for acid resistance conferred by EvgA overexpression; AraC family	YdeO is an EvgA-, GadE-dependent global regulator that is induced by UV light exposure; after UV induction, YdeO controls the expression of 21 genes: 8 activated and 13 repressed (Yamanaka, 2012). EvgAS regulon. YdeO induces GadE expression. YdeO and YdeP repress the type III secretion system (TTSS) of EPEC E. coli (Nadler, 2006).	b1499
ydeP	None	putative oxidoreductase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Acid-resistance protein; required for acid resistance conferred by EvgA overexpression; oxidoreductase homolog	EvgAS regulon. YdeO and YdeP repress the type III secretion system (TTSS) of EPEC E. coli (Nadler, 2006).	b1501
ydeQ	fmlD	putative fimbrial-like adhesin protein	Putative structural component; Surface structures	Predicted fimbrial-like adhesin protein	The first 24 aa of YdeQ are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b1502
ydeR	None	putative fimbrial-like adhesin protein	Putative structural component; Surface structures	FimA homolog	YdeR is one of 25 FimA homologs in E. coli K-12. The first 23 aa of YdeR are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b1503
ydeS	None	putative fimbrial-like adhesin protein	Putative structural component; Surface structures	FimA homolog	YdeS is one of 25 FimA homologs in E. coli K-12. The first 22 aa of YdeS are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b1504
ydeT'	fmlC 	pseudogene	Null	Pseudogene, FimD family, C-terminal fragment; fimbrial export usher protein family	Outer membrane fimbrial subunit export usher protein FimD family.	b1505
lsrK	ydeV	autoinducer-2 (AI-2) kinase	Enzyme; Not classified	Autoinducer-2 (AI-2) kinase; upregulated in biofilms	LsrK phosphorylates AI-2; phospo-AI-2 is retained in the cytoplasm. lsr operon induction by exogenous AI-2 requires LsrK, indicating phospho-AI-2, or a derivative, is the LsrR inducer. LsrK is a sugar kinase homolog. LsrK was mistakenly identified as BRAG1 human gene. bcl-2 homology report is suspect. Biofilm microarray result was validated with RT-PCR.	b1511
lsrR	ydeW	lsr operon transcriptional repressor	Regulator; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	lsrACDBFGE operon regulator for autoinducer-2 (AI-2) uptake; induced by phospho-AI-2	LsrR is also involved in a DHAP repression of the lsr operon. LsrR and YjhU are COG2390-related paralogs with Sigma 70-like N-terminal DNA-binding domains and C-terminal substrate-binding domains related to sugar-binding domains like that in the Gram+ DeoR repressor.	b1512
lsrA	ego, lsrA, ydeX	autoinducer 2 import ATP-binding protein	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	Autoinducer 2 (AI-2) import ATP-binding protein; essential for aerobic growth; upregulated in biofilms	LsrA is in an operon regulated by LsrR and LuxS, through AI-2. Biofilm microarray result was validated with RT-PCR. CRP regulon.	b1513
lsrC	ydeY	autoinducer 2 import system permease protein	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	Autoinducer 2 (AI-2) import system permease protein	LsrC is paralogous to ribose transport membrane channel protein RbsC and is in an operon regulated by LsrR and LuxS, through AI-2.	b1514
lsrD	ydeZ	autoinducer 2 import system permease protein	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	Autoinducer-2 (AI-2) import system permease protein	LsrD is paralogous to ribose transport membrane channel protein RbsC and is in an operon regulated by LsrR and LuxS, through AI-2.	b1515
lsrB	yneA	autoinducer 2-binding protein	Putative regulator; Not classified	Autoinducer-2 (AI-2)-binding protein	Salmonella LsrB binds a chemically distinct form of the AI-2 signal, (2R,4S)-2-methyl-2,3,3,4-tetrahydroxytetrahydrofuran (R-THMF), that lacks the boron found in Vibrio AI-2. LsrB is paralogous to ribose transport periplasmic binding protein RbsB and is in an operon regulated by LsrR and LuxS, through AI-2. otherPDB (S. typhimurium): 1TJY, 1TM2.	b1516
lsrF	yneB	putative autoinducer-2 (AI-2) aldolase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Putative autoinducer-2 (AI-2) aldolase	LsrF is part of an operon for autoinducer-2 (AI-2) uptake regulated by LsrR and LuxS, through AI-2. LsrF is homologous to Bacillus deoxyribose-phosphate aldolase DeoC.	b1517
lsrG	yneC	autoinducer-2 (AI-2) degrading protein LsrG	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Autoinducer 2-degrading protein; ygiN paralog	LsrG is part of an operon for autoinducer-2 (AI-2) uptake regulated by LsrR and LuxS, through AI-2.	b1518
tam	lsrE, yneD	trans-aconitate methyltransferase	Enzyme; Detoxification	Trans-aconitate 2-methyltransferase, SAM-dependent	tam(lsrE) is the last gene in lsr operon.	b1519
yneE	None	bestrophin family putative inner membrane protein	Null	Predicted inner membrane protein, bestrophin family; possible chloride channel; required for swarming phenotype	Pfam PF01062.	b1520
yneF	None	putative membrane-bound diguanylate cyclase	Null	Predicted membrane-bound diguanylate cyclase	YneF has an N-terminal integral membrane domain with four predicted TM helices that may function as TM signaling domain, analagous to the eight TM helix MASE domains found in other c-di-GMP proteins. YneF has a C-terminal putative diguanylate cyclase GGDEF domain.	b1522
yneG	None	DUF4186 family protein	Null	DUF4186 family protein	yneG is in an operon with glsB and may be involved with glutamine catabolism.	b1523
glsB	glsA2, yneH	glutaminase 2	Enzyme; l-glutamine catabolism	Glutaminase 2; GlsA2	Two glutaminases have been purified and biochemically characterized from E. coli B. glsB(yneH) is required for growth on l-glutamine as the sole source of carbon and nitrogen and might contribute to acid resistance (Brown, 2008). glsB(yneH) was identified as a multicopy suppressor of both serA and serC deletions (Patrick, 2007).	b1524
sad	yneI	succinate semialdehyde dehydrogenase, NAD(P)+-dependent	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Succinate semialdehyde dehydrogenase, NAD(P)(+)-dependent; SSADH; SSDH	sad gene expression is induced by exogenous succinate semialdehyde (Fuhrer, 2007). sad(yneI) gene expression is induced by putrescine (Kurihara, 2010). Sad is also known as succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase. GabD, AldA, BetB, PuuC, FeaB, Prr(YdcW), AldB, AstD, PutA, MaoC, EutE and AdhE are Sad paralogs. OtherPDB(S.t.): 3ETF,3EFV.	b1525
yneJ	None	putative DNA-binding transcriptional regulator	Putative regulator; Not classified	LysR-family transcriptional regulator, lamB regulator	yneJ mutants have less phage lambda infectivity due to reduced lamB expression, although the effect might be indirect (Maynard, 2010).	b1526
yneK	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Uncharacterized protein, function unknown	No homologs have yet been found for YneK, which is unusual for a protein of this size.	b1527
rspR	ydfH	transcriptional repressor for rspAB	Regulator; Degradation of small molecules	Transcriptional repressor for rspAB	The rspR(ydfH) repressor gene is separated from the regulated rspAB target genes by insertion of the Kim/Qin prophage in K-12 strains; RspR(YdfH) primarily regulates rspAB (Sakihama, 2012). 2/17 RspR(YdfH) peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed (Maillet, 2007). The ydfH gene has been renamed as rspR (H. Mizoguchi, personal communicaton).	b1540
ydfI	None	putative NAD-dependent D-mannonate oxidoreductase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Predicted D-mannonate oxidoreductase, NAD-dependent	MtlD, UxaB, UxuB, YdfI and YeiQ are all COG0246/PF01232 members encoding mannitol/altrunate-related sugar oxidoreductases. UxuB, YdfI and YeiQ are all part of the UxuB sub-family of mannonate oxidoreductases.	b1542
ydfJ'	ynfP	pseudogene, MFS transporter family; interrupted by Qin prophage	Phage or Prophage Related	Pseudogene reconstruction, MFS transporter family; possible K(+) transporter; interrupted by Qin prophage	The C-terminal portion of the interrupted ydfJ' pseudogene was expresed in mamallian cells and found to be a K(+) channel (Tang, 2011). The first 28 codons of ydfJ were separated by the insertion of 20,460 bp of the Qin prophage; 28 aa (translated from 1650862 to 1650779 bp) have been added back to the YdfJ protein sequence presented. An intact version is present in E. coli 536 (UniProtKB: Q0THP5). The insertion of Qin appears to have generated an 11 bp duplication GAAATCCATAA (1650768 to 1650778 bp) which may represent the Qin att site. Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS).	b4600
ydfK	None	cold shock protein, function unknown, Qin prophage	Phage or Prophage Related	Cold shock gene, function unknown, Qin prophage	An unusually long 349 nt 5' UTR of the ydfK mRNA can act as a thermosensing post-transcriptional regulator of YdfK translation (Raghaven, 2011). YdfK differs from YnaE by one residue.	b1544
pinQ	ydfL	Qin prophage; putative site-specific recombinase	Phage or Prophage Related	Predicted DNA-invertase, Qin prophage	Null	b1545
tfaQ	ydfM	Qin prophage; putative tail fibre assembly protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Phage lambda tail fiber assembly gene homolog, Qin prophage	Null	b1546
stfQ	ydfN	Qin prophage; putative side tail fibre assembly protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Side-tail fiber protein, Qin prophage	Null	b1547
ydfO	None	Qin prophage; DUF1398 family protein	Phage or Prophage Related	DUF1398 family protein, Qin prophage	YbcV (DLP12), YdfO (Qin) and YcgX are paralogs of the DUF1398 family encoding phage and prophage proteins found exclusively in E. coli and Salmonella; ycgX is not annotated as being within a prophage but it is only two kilobases away from the e14 prophage and may be a misplaced e14 gene.	b1549
rzpQ	Rz, ydfP	Qin prophage; Rz-like protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Rz-like equivalent, Qin prophage	rzoQ is a newly predicted lipoprotein gene nested within the renamed rzpQ(ydfP) gene, based on homology to the Rz-like and Rz1-like proteins in the Salmonella (serotype-converting) bacteriophage epsilon15 genome (Kropinski, 2007; Summer, 2007).	b1553
rrrQ	arrQ, ydfQ	Qin prophage; putative lysozyme	Phage or Prophage Related	Phage lambda lysozyme R protein homolog, Qin prophage	RrrD(YbcS) and RrrQ(YdfQ) are distant homologs of the phage lambda lysozyme R protein, as evidenced by all three matching to the pfam00959 profile (E values for pfam00959 hits using NCBI Conserved Domain (CD) Search: RrrD [4e-28]; RrrQ [1e-20]; lambda lysozyme R protein [5e-18]. The first 23 aa (SignalP-NN) or the first 22 aa (SignalP-HMM) of RrrQ are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. The previous R homolog names arrQ and arrD have been changed to rrrQ and rrrD because arrS is an sRNA gene name.	b1554
ydfR	None	Qin prophage; DUF1327 family protein	Phage or Prophage Related	DUF1327 family protein, Qin prophage	Null	b1555
essQ	ydfS	Qin prophage; putative S lysis protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Phage lambda S lysis holin protein homolog, Qin prophage	Null	b1556
quuQ	ydfT	Qin prophage; putative antitermination protein Q	Phage or Prophage Related	Lambda Q antitermination protein homolog, Qin prophage	QuuQ contains an insertion of 47 aa that splits the phage antiterminator Q protein family 2 domain (pfam03589) after residue 109. This insertion matches pfam00684 (DnaJ_CXXCXGXG, DnaJ central domain) with E=2e-04. It also hits a DnaJ COG0484, but with a marginal E=0.002. quuQ is required for swarming (Inoue, 2006). Transcriptional antiterminator proteins bind to RNA polymerase and allow readthrough of rho-independent terminators, positively regulating the expression of downstream genes.	b1559
ydfU	None	Qin prophage; DUF968 family protein	Phage or Prophage Related	DUF968 family protein, Qin prophage	Null	b1560
ydfV	None	Qin prophage; uncharacterized protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Uncharacterized protein, Qin prophage	Null	b1565
intK'	ydfW	pseudogene, integrase fragment, Qin prophage	Phage or Prophage Related	Pseudogene, integrase fragment, Qin prophage	A previous 75 aa version of an intact IntK(YdfW) has been replaced with this 60 aa intK'(ydfW') C-terminal pseudogene, which contains the original 49 aa ORF version of b1567. An intact version of 437 aa IntK (hits PF00665) is found in E. coli ATCC 8739 (EcolC_2069, NCBI: 169755010).	b1567
ydfX'	None	pseudogene, Qin prophage	Phage or Prophage Related	Pseudogene, Qin prophage	A full length 173 aa YdfX is represented by E. coli Crooks strain protein EcolC_2060 which belongs to the PF06254 DUF1019 family (UniProtKB: B1IR20).	b1568
gnsB	ydfY	Qin prophage; multicopy suppressor of secG(Cs) and fabA6(Ts)	Phage or Prophage Related	Multicopy suppressor of secG(Cs) and fabA6(Ts), Qin prophage; overexpression increases unsaturated fatty acid content of phospholipids; gnsA paralog	The Escherichia coli CFT073 gnsB ortholog is annotated as an 88 amino acid protein due to extension of N-terminus. However, homology does not extend into upstream region and K-12 has an in-frame stop in N-terminal extension region. Therefore GnsB of CFT073 is probably also 57 aa long. Conservation with GnsA paralog and presence of excellent gnsB RBS also supports this conclusion. PRediction of start codon indicated is to allow more spacing between the ATG and the RBS.	b1550
ydfZ	None	selenoprotein, function unknown	Null	Selenoprotein, function unknown	YdfZ binds selenium tightly even after denaturation, possibly as a perselenide to Cys52, perhaps indicative of a role in selenium transport (Lacourciere, 2002). The ydfZ promoter region binds FNR and ydfZ expression is activated by FNR (Federowicz, 2014).	b1541
ynfA	None	UPF0060 family inner membrane protein	Null	UPF0060 family inner membrane protein, function unknown	The membrane protein YnfA has been topology mapped using protein fusions (Drew, 2002). False positive lipoprotein prediction.	b1582
ynfB	None	UPF0482 family putative periplasmic protein	Null	UPF0482 family predicted periplasmic protein, function unknown	The first 28 aa of YnfB are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b1583
ynfC	None	UPF0257 family lipoprotein	Null	UPF0257 family lipoprotein, function unknown	Predicted inner membrane localization. First 16 aa are a type II signal peptide.	b1585
ynfD	None	DUF1161 family periplasmic protein	Null	DUF1161 family periplasmic protein, function unknown	YnfD overexpression causes leaky, dye-permeable membranes (Raivio, 2013). YnfD is a periplasmic protein with a verified 21 aa signal peptide (Wassinger, 1998).	b1586
ynfE	None	putative selenate reductase, periplasmic	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Probable selenate reductase, periplasmic	A double ynfE ynfF mutation is required to eliminate selenate reductase activity, suggesting they are selenate reductase isozymes (Guymer, 2009). DmsA and YnfE are paralogs that interfere with YnfFGH assembly.Verified Tat substrate: YnfE has a Tat-only (Class I) predicted 42 aa signal peptide (Tullman-Ercek, 2007). ynfE is regulated by FNR in vivo and in vitro (Kang, 2005).	b1587
ynfF	None	S- and N-oxide reductase, A subunit, periplasmic	Putative enzyme; Not classified	S- and N-oxide reductase, A subunit; periplasmic	A double ynfE ynfF mutation is required to eliminate selenate reductase activity, suggesting they are selenate reductase isozymes (Guymer, 2009). Verified Tat substrate: YnfF has a Tat-only (Class II) predicted 45 aa signal peptide (Tullman-Ercek, 2007). The physiological substrate and relevance of the YnfFGH S- and N-oxide reductase is unknown. DmsA paralog. So far, hydroxy pyridine N-oxide is the best in vitro substrate for YnfFGH. ynfFGH are expressed anaerobically.	b1588
ynfG	None	oxidoreductase, Fe-S subunit	Putative enzyme; Not classified	S- and N-oxide reductase, apparent Fe-S binding subunit; required for swarming phenotype	The physiological substrate and relevance of the YnfFGH S- and N-oxide reductase is unknown. DmsB paralog. So far, hydroxy pyridine N-oxide is the best substrate for YnfFGH. ynfFGH are expressed anaerobically. YnfG can function with DmsAC, replacing DmsB as the electron transfer subunit.	b1589
ynfH	None	oxidoreductase, membrane subunit	Putative enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	S- and N-oxide reductase, membrane bound anchor	The physiological substrate and relevance of the YnfFGH S- and N-oxide reductase is unknown. DmsC paralog. So far, hydroxy pyridine N-oxide is the best substrate for YnfFGH. ynfFGH are expressed anaerobically. YnfH can function with DmsAB, replacing DMSC as the anchor subunit.	b1590
dmsD	ynfI	twin-argninine leader-binding protein for DmsA and TorA	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Redox enzyme maturation protein (REMP) for DmsA; twin-arginine leader-binding protein; binds DmsA and TorA TAT signal peptides; required for anaerobic growth on glycerol-DMSO medium; stimulates growth on glycerol-fumarate	dmsD is the fifth gene in the dmsABC-like operon ynfEFGH-dmsD. torD, dmsD and ycdY are paralogs. Overexpressed YdcY and DmsD interfere with apoTorA maturation by TorD, independent of the TorA signal peptide (Ilbert, 2004). DmsD may assist in DmsAB co-factor insertion. DmsD interacts with TatBC.	b1591
clcB	mriT, ynfJ	H(+)/Cl(-) exchange transporter	Transport; Not classified	H(+)/Cl(-) exchange transporter; involved in the extreme acid response	ClcA and ClcB encode redundant chloride transporters; single mutants have no phenotype. ClcA, ClcB and YfeO belong to the Pfam PF00654 Voltage_CLC family of ion channels and ion exchange transporters.	b1592
ynfK	None	putative dethiobiotin synthetase	Null	Predicted dethiobiotin synthase, function unknown	The ynfK promoter region binds FNR and ynfK expression is activated by FNR (Federowicz, 2014). YnfK is 50% identical to paralog BioD.	b1593
ynfL	None	LysR family putative transcriptional regulator	Putative regulator; Not classified	Putative LysR-family transcriptional regulator, function unknown; overexpression confers sensitivity to acriflavin and trimethoprim	A ynfLM clone conferred hypersensitivity to acriflavin, but a ynfM-alone expression clone did not, leading the authors to conclude that overexpression of the putative regulator YnfL was responsible for the Acr-S phenoptype.	b1595
cusR	silR(S.t.), ylcA	response regulator in two-component regulatory system with CusS	Putative regulator; Not classified	Response regulator of the cusCFBA-cusRS divergent operons; cusS sensor and cusR mediate copper induction	Null	b0571
rutG	ycdG	pyrimidine permease	Transport; Pyrimidine nitrogen catabolism	Pyrimidine permease; pyrimidine nitrogen catabolism; required for efficient utilization of uracil and thymine	Constitutive derepression of the the rut operon (ntrB) is required for the utilization of thymidine, uridine and cytidine as nitrogen sources at 37C, but not at room temperature. NtrC regulon.	b1006
rutF	ycdH	flavin:NADH reductase	Enzyme; Pyrimidine nitrogen catabolism	 Flavin:NADH reductase; required for the regeneration of FMN for RutA in vivo	Constitutive derepression of the the rut operon (ntrB) is required for the utilization of thymidine, uridine and cytidine as nitrogen sources at 37C, but not at room temperature. The in vivo requirement for the RutF flavin reductase to regenerate FMN for RutA can be substituted for by Fre in vitro and by unknown genetic suppressors in vivo (Mukherjee, 2010; Kim, 2010). NtrC regulon.	b1007
rutE	ycdI	putative malonic semialdehyde reductase	Enzyme; Pyrimidine nitrogen catabolism	Putative malonic semialdehyde reductase; pyrimidine nitrogen catabolism; reduces toxic malonic semaldehyde, which is required for pyrimidine nitrogen degradation in vivo but not in vitro	Constitutive derepression of the the rut operon by a ntrB mutation is required for the utilization of thymidine, uridine and cytidine as nitrogen sources at 37C, but not at room temperature. In vivo, RutE is predicted to convert the toxic RutB product malonic semialdehyde (3-oxopropionic acid) into 3-hydroxypropionic acid, which is then excreted; and it is required for efficient growth using uridine as sole nitrogen source at 37C; RutE is presumably supplemented by the YdfG malonic semialdehyde reductase under these conditions since both are apparently required to detoxify malonic semialdehyde and allow for efficient growth; the uridine growth defects of both rutE and ydfG mutants can be suppressed by nemR mutations overproducing the NemA reductase (Kim, 2010). nfsA, nfsB, rutE, and ydjA are paralogs. NtrC regulon.	b1008
rutD	ycdJ	putative reactive intermediate detoxifying aminoacrylate hydrolase	Enzyme; Pyrimidine nitrogen catabolism	Putative aminoacrylate hydrolase; reactive intermediate detoxification; required for pyrimidine nitrogen degradation in vivo but not in vitro	Constitutive derepression of the the rut operon (ntrB) is required for the utilization of thymidine, uridine and cytidine as nitrogen sources at 37C, but not at room temperature. The RutB product aminoacrylate peracid is reduced spontaneously to toxic aminoacrylate which spontaneously hydrolyzes to malonic semialdehyde in vitro; RutD is proposed to accelerate the hydrolysis of aminoacrylate in vivo to avoid toxicity (Kim, 2010). Since the enamine/imine deaminase RutC is now predicted to detoxify aminoacrylate, either RutC and RutD are two different ways to detoxify aminoacrylate, or one of them has a different substrate (Lambrecht, 2012). NtrC regulon.	b1009
rutC	ycdK	putative aminoacrylate deaminase, reactive intermediate detoxification; weak enamine/imine deaminase activity	Enzyme; Pyrimidine nitrogen catabolism	Putative aminoacrylate deaminase; trimeric; weak enamine/imine deaminase activity; reactive intermediate detoxification; required for pyrimidine nitrogen degradation in vivo but not in vitro	The RutB product aminoacrylate peracid is toxic and is reduced spontaneously to aminoacrylate, which then spontaneously hydrolyzes to malonic semialdehyde in vitro; the reaction intermediate deaminase RutC probably accelerates the deamination of aminoacrylate in vivo to avoid toxicity (Kim, 2010; Lambrecht, 2012). The Salmonella PF01042 family member RidA(YjgF) is an enamine/imine deaminase required in vivo for the detoxification of reactive intermediates of the PLP-dependent threonine/serine dehydratase IlvA, releasing ammonia in a hydrolysis reaction indicative of the low water environment of the cell; RutC has weak enamine/imine deaminase activity as measured by an increased initial rate of IlvA-catalyzed 2-ketobutyrate formation in vitro using either threonine or serine as substrate; the weak reaction of RutC as compared to other RidA homologs is likely due to relatively low sequence similarity and use of a non-native substrate (Lambrecht, 2012). RidA(YjgF), RutC, TdcF, YoaB and YjgH are paralogs and members of a highly conserved RidA(YjgF) family (pfam:PF01042) with diverse mutant phenotypes; the family members form homotrimers, some binding 2-ketoglutarate or related compounds, and all are probably reactive intermediate deaminases. Constitutive derepression of the the rut operon (ntrB) is required for the utilization of thymidine, uridine and cytidine as nitrogen sources at 37C, but not at room temperature. The structure of RutC from E. coli O6 has been determined and is 100% identical to the K-12 RutC sequence (Knapik, 2012). The rat homolog PSP (perchloric acid-soluble protein) has been reported to have endoribonuclease activity, Endoribonuclease L, against ss mRNA, inhibiting translation. NtrC regulon.	b1010
rutB	ycdL	ureidoacrylate amidohydrolase	Enzyme; Pyrimidine nitrogen catabolism	Ureidoacrylate amidohydrolase; pyrimidine nitrogen catabolism	Constitutive derepression of the the rut operon (ntrB) is required for the utilization of thymidine, uridine and cytidine as nitrogen sources at 37C, but not at room temperature. RutB probably hydrolyzes the RutA product ureidoacrylate peracid quickly in vivo to avoid toxicity, but can also hydrolyze any ureidoacrylate that is formed spontaneously; the RutB product aminoacrylate peracid is also toxic and is reduced spontaneously to aminoacrylate which spontaneously hydrolyzes to malonic semialdehyde in vitro; RutC and/or RutD may accelerate aminoacrylate hydrolysis in vivo to avoid toxicity (Kim, 2010; Lambrecht, 2012). NtrC regulon.	b1011
rutA	ycdM	pyrimidine oxygenase, FMN-dependent	Enzyme; Pyrimidine nitrogen catabolism	Pyrimidine oxygenase, FMN-dependent; pyrimidine nitrogen catabolism; requires RutF to regenerate FMN in vivo	Constitutive derepression of the the rut operon (ntrB) is required for the utilization of thymidine, uridine and cytidine as nitrogen sources at 37C, but not at room temperature. RutA cleaves pyrmidine rings directly by adding oxygen atoms, making a toxic ureidoacrylate peracid product which can be spontaneously reduced to ureidoacrylate; RutB probably hydrolyzes ureidoacrylate peracid quickly in vivo to avoid toxicity, and can also hydrolyze any ureidoacrylate that is formed spontaneously; the in vivo requirement for the RutF flavin reductase to regenerate FMN for RutA can be substituted for by Fre in vitro and by unknown genetic suppressors in vivo (Mukherjee, 2010; Kim, 2010). NtrC regulon.	b1012
efeU'	ycdN	ferrous iron permease (pseudogene)	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction, ferrous iron permease; intact gene involved in iron uptake	The EfeUOB tripartite iron transporter is silent in E. coli k-12 due to a mutation in EfeU (Cao, 2007). A frameshift at position 36 was conceptually repaired, using the wildtype allele from Shigella sonnei Ss046 as a guide, the frameshifted codon (conceptually translated as X) probably encoded a Gly residue. An intact EfeU from E. coli strain Nissle 1917 was functionally characterized as an iron transporter in vivo and in vitro; efeUOB of K-12 are transcribed as an iron-depletion-inducible, Fur-dependent operon (McHugh, 2003; Grosse, 2006). FTR1 iron transporter family. CpxAR-regulon.	b4490
efeO	ycdO	inactive ferrous ion transporter EfeUOB	Null	Inactive acid-inducible low-pH ferrous ion transporter EfeUOB; acid-inducible periplasmic protein	The EfeUOB tripartite iron transporter is silent in E. coli K-12 due to a mutation in EfeU (Cao, 2007). efeO(ycdO) has been reported to be both an essential gene (DeVito, 2002) and non-essential (Baba, 2006). The Tat-targeting of EfeO(YcdO) translocation could not be assessed (Tullman-Ercek, 2007). The first 26 aa of efeO have been confirmed to be a type I signal peptide by electrospray MS of the intact periplasmic protein (Sturm, 2006). efeUOB of K-12 are transcribed as an iron-depletion-inducible, Fur-dependent operon (McHugh, 2003; Grosse, 2006). EfeO(YcdO) protein levels increased after 30 min of Zn(II) stress (Easton, 2006). Mutations in efeO have a hyperlethality phenotype when cells are stressed; EfeO is a protein that reduces the lethal effects of stress (Han, 2010).	b1018
pgaD	hmsS(Y.p.), ycdP	biofilm PGA synthase PgaCD, regulatory subunit; c-di-GMP-stimulated activity and dimerization	Enzyme; Surface polysaccharides and antigens	Biofilm PGA synthase PgaCD, regulatory subunit; c-di-GMP-stimulated activity and dimerization	PgaC is the catalytic subunit of the inner membrane PgaCD poly-beta-1,6-N-acetyl-D-glucosamine synthase required for formation of the biofilm adhesin polysaccharide PGA by polymerizing and exporting cytoplasmic UDP-N-acetylglucosamine to the periplasm without a carrier protein; c-di-GMP binds allosterically to a pocket formed by PgaCD dimerization, stabilizing the PgaD regulatory subunit and activating PgaCD activity (Steiner, 2012). Full induction of pgaD requires c-di-GMP specifically produced by DgcZ(YdeH) (Boehm, 2009). pgaD complements a mutation in the homologous Y. pestis hemin storage gene hmsS. CsrA regulon. PGA, also known as PNAG, is poly-beta-1,6-N-acetyl-D-glucosamine.	b1021
pgaC	hmsR(Y.p.), ycdQ	biofilm PGA synthase PgaCD, catalytic subunit; poly-beta-1,6-N-acetyl-D-glucosamine synthase	Enzyme; Surface polysaccharides and antigens	Biofilm PGA synthase PgaCD, catalytic subunit; poly-beta-1,6-N-acetyl-D-glucosamine synthase; c-di-GMP-stimulated activity and dimerization	PgaC is the catalytic subunit of the inner membrane PgaCD poly-beta-1,6-N-acetyl-D-glucosamine synthase required for formation of the biofilm adhesin polysaccharide PGA by polymerizing and exporting cytoplasmic UDP-N-acetylglucosamine to the periplasm without a carrier protein; c-di-GMP binds allosterically to a pocket formed by PgaCD dimerization, stabilizing the PgaD regulatory subunit and activating PgaCD activity (Steiner, 2012). PgaC complements a mutation in the homologous Y. pestis hemin storage gene hmsR. Two predicted transmembrane domains at the N-terminus and three at the C-terminus may anchor PgaC, which has a large central, possibly periplasmic, domain. CsrA regulon. PGA, also known as PNAG, is poly-beta-1,6-N-acetyl-D-glucosamine.	b1022
pgaB	ycdR	poly-beta-1,6-N-acetyl-D-glucosamine (PGA) N-deacetylase outer membrane export lipoprotein	Transport; Surface polysaccharides & antigens	Poly-beta-1,6-N-acetyl-D-glucosamine (PGA) N-deacetylase; deacetylase required for biofilm adhesin polysaccharide PGA export; outer membrane lipoprotein	About 3% of the PGA molecules are N-deacetylated by PgaB during export (Itoh, 2008). PgaB is homologous to Y. pestis hemin storage protein HmsF, but is unable to complement hmsF mutations. The first 20 aa of PgaB constitute a type II signal peptide. CsrA regulon. Poly-beta-1,6-N-acetyl-D-glucosamine (PGA), is a biofilm adhesin polysaccharide also abbreviated as PNAG.	b1023
pgaA	ycdS	biofilm adhesin polysaccharide PGA secretin; OM porin; poly-beta-1,6-N-acetyl-D-glucosamine export protein	Transport; Surface polysaccharides & antigens	Biofilm adhesin polysaccharide PGA secretin; OM porin	PgaA is homologous to Y. pestis hemin storage protein HmsH, but is unable to complement hmsH mutations. PgaA is predicted to have a 26 aa signal peptide. CsrA regulon. PGA, also known as PNAG, is poly-beta-1,6-N-acetyl-D-glucosamine.	b1024
ycdT	None	diguanylate cyclase, membrane-anchored	Null	Diguanylate cyclase, membrane-anchored	YcdT mRNA is translationally repressed by CsrA (Jonas, 2008). ycdT overexpression causes a 20-fold increase in c-di-GMP and represses motility, but a mutant has little effect (Jonas, 2008). The results of Jonas (2008) might indicate that although the c-di-GMP spike inhibits motility it is not known if this is the normal function of the overproduced diguanylate cyclase or if the overexpression induced non-physiological crosstalk. YcdT is homologous to Y. pestis hemin storage gene hmsT, but is unable to complement hmsT mutations. YcdT has been shown not to be a regulator of the divergent pgaABCD operon. Codon usage indicates ycdT is an alien (horizontal) gene. YcdT has an N-terminal integral membrane domain with 8 predicted TM helices reminiscent of the MASE TM signaling domains in other c-di-GMP enzymes. YcdT has a C-terminal diguanylate cyclase GGDEF domain.	b1025
ycdU	None	putative inner membrane protein	Null	Putative inner membrane protein	The adjacent downstream region contains four copies of the rsX tRNA-linked repeats that were originally annotated as protein-coding (YcdV, b1031) in U00096.1. ycdV has been dropped as an unlikely CDS prediction.	b1029
ghrA	ycdW	glyoxylate/hydroxypyruvate reductase A	Enzyme; Not classified	Glyoxylate/hydroxypyruvate reductase A; activity higher on glyoxylate than hydroxypyruvate	Null	b1033
ycdX	None	alkaline phosphatase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Phosphorus compounds	Alkaline phosphatase; required for swarming phenotype; chaperoned by YcdY	YcdX binds zinc (Sevcenco, 2011). The YcdX structure reveals a trinuclear zinc active site. Like Pol III alpha (DnaE), YcdX has a PHP domain. YcdY and YcdX are required for swarming; YcdY binds to YcdX and increases the alkaline phosphatase activity of YcdX after denaturation and in the presence of zinc, although YcdY does not bind zinc itself (Redelberger; 2011).	b1034
ycdY	None	redox enzyme maturation protein (REMP) chaperone for YcdX	Putative enzyme; Not classified	YcdX chaperone; redox enzyme maturation protein (REMP); required for swarming phenotype	YcdY and YcdX are required for swarming; YcdY binds to YcdX and increases the alkaline phosphatase activity of YcdX after denaturation and in the presence of zinc, although YcdY does not bind zinc itself (Redelberger; 2011). torD, dmsD and ycdY are paralogs. Overexpressed YdcY and DmsD interfere with apoTorA maturation by TorD, independent of the TorA signal peptide (Ilbert, 2004). YcdY is a putative TAT signal peptide binding protein and co-factor insertion chaperone.	b1035
ycdZ	nupT	DUF1097 family inner membrane protein	Null	DUF1097 family inner membrane protein	A bioinformatics search for coupled CRP-CytR binding sites identified YcdZ(NupT) as a predicted CytR-CRP-regulated protein; although there is no evidence that YcdZ is a transporter, it was predicted to be a nucleoside permease because it is a membrane protein and the other inner membrane proteins regulated by CytR-CRP are the NupC and NupG transporters (Sernova, 2012).	b1036
ymdA	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Function unknown, pfam00419 family, fimbrial protein	The first 22 aa are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. This class of fimbrial proteins are predicted to be involved in pilus length regulation and adhesion.	b1044
ymdB	None	O-acetyl-ADP-ribose deacetylase; RNase III inhibitor during cold shock; putative cardiolipin synthase C regulatory subunit	Null	O-acetyl-ADP-ribose deacetylase; RNase III inhibitor during cold shock; putative cardiolipin synthase C regulatory subunit	YmdB is a member of the macrodomain family and is responsible for processing the product of protein lysine deacetylation by sirituins such as CobB (Chen, 2011). Full activity of ClsC requires co-expression in the same clone with the upstream gene ymdB; ClsC expression alone or clsC and ymdB expresssion from separate plasmids produces only small amounts of cardiolipin; YmdB is suggested to be a stimulatory subunit of a two-component cardiolipin synthase (Tan, 2012). An alternative explanation for the need to co-express ymdB with clsC to get full ClsC activity may be an obligatory translational coupling of ymdB and clsC needed to get efficient translation using the ClsC TTG start codon (K.E.R.) YmdB binds directly to RNase III (Kim, 2008). Pfam PF01661 family. UPF0189 family. RpoS regulon.	b1045
clsC	ymdC	stationary phase cardiolipin synthase 3	Enzyme; Macromolecule synthesis: Phospholipids	Cardiolipin synthase 3, active in stationary phase	ClsC uses PE, not PG, as the phosphatidyl donor to PG to form cardiolipin (Tan, 2012). Three paralogous cls genes encoding cardiolipin synthases, clsA(cls), clsB(ybhO) and clsC(ymdC), need to be deleted in order to prevent in vivo cardiolipin synthesis; most studies on the effects of cardiolipin depletion only used clsA(cls) mutant strains that still sythesize cardiolipin (Tan, 2012). Full activity of ClsC requires co-expression in the same clone with the upstream gene ymdB; ClsC expression alone or clsC and ymdB expresssion from separate plasmids produces only small amounts of cardiolipin; YmdB is suggested to be a stimulatory subunit of a two-component cardiolipin synthase (Tan, 2012). An alternative explanation for the need to co-express ymdB with clsC to get full ClsC activity may be an obligatory translational coupling of ymdB and clsC needed to get efficient translation using the ClsC TTG start codon (K.E.R.) ClsC utilizes a novel mechanism for cardiolipin synthesis in that phosphatidylethanolamine is used as the phosphatidyl donor to phosphatidylglycerol to form cardiolipin; mutating the two conserved phospholipase D superfamily motifs oblated ClsC activity (Tan, 2012). RpoS regulon.	b1046
opgC	mdoC, ymdD	OPG biosynthetic transmembrane succinyltransferase	Null	OPG biosynthetic transmembrane succinyltransferase	The opg genes were originally called mdo because the osmoregulated periplasmic glucans (OPGs) were originally called membrane-derived oligosaccharides.	b1047
cspI	cspJ	Qin prophage; cold shock protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Cold shock protein I, Qin prophage	Null	b1552
mdtH	yceL	multidrug resistance efflux transporter conferring overexpression resistance to norfloxacin and enoxacin	Null	Multidrug resistance efflux transporter; overexpression resistance to norfloxacin and enoxacin	Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS). 	b1065
yceM	mviM(S.t.), mviS(S.t.)	putative oxidoreductase	Putative factor; Not classified	Predicted oxidoreductase, function unknown	yceM was identified as one of two ORFs adjacent to the flg locus in a region originally named mviS, then renamed mviN and mviM when sequenced; mviMN was thought to be required for mouse virulence in Salmonella, but the mviMN deletion in ST39 also removed flgM (Carsiotis, 1989). flgM was later shown to be able to complement the mviS phenotype, and thus flgM is the real mouse virulence gene mviS in this region of the Salmonella chromosome (Schmitt, 1994).	b1068
murJ	mviN(S.t.), mviS(S.t.), yceN	putative lipid II flippase	Putative factor; Not classified	Putative lipid II flippase; required for murein synthesis	Inactivation of MurJ in vivo, but not FtsW, blocks lipid II translocation (Sham, 2014). Overproduced FtsW but not overproduced MurJ increases lipid II translocation across the cytoplasmic membrane in crude reconstituted vesicles (Mohammadi, 2011). Both FtsW and MurJ are involved in lipid II translocation but which one is the actual flippase is controversial with conflicting in vivo and in vitro results; the in vitro results utilize crude membrane vesicles that also contain MurJ, which may not be limiting; the in vivo results do not demonstrate flippase activity directly and FtsW inactivation could be incomplete, so one of the two proteins could be stimulating the other which has the flippase activity; MurJ is related to known flippase exporters and FtsW is not, suggesting that MurJ may indeed be the actual flippase (Young, 2014). murJ(yceN) is an essential gene and conditional lethal mutants swell, burst and accumulate the murein intermediate polyprenyl diphosphate-N-acetylmuramic acid-(pentapeptide)-N-acetyl-glucosamine at the non-permissive temperature (Inoue, 2008). murJ(yceN) was identified as one of two ORFs adjacent to the flg locus in a region originally named mviS, then renamed mviN and mviM when sequenced; mviMN was thought to be required for mouse virulence in Salmonella, but the mviMN deletion in ST39 also removed flgM (Carsiotis, 1989). flgM was later shown to be able to complement the mviS phenotype, and thus flgM is the real mouse virulence gene in this region of the Salmonella chromosome not mviS (Schmitt, 1994).	b1069
sfmA	fimA(S.t.)	FimA homolog, function unknown	Putative structural component; Surface structures	FimA homolog	The sfmACDHF-sfmZ genes in centisome 12 are a remnant of a region that is orthologous to the Salmonella enterica fimA[I]CDHF-fim[WY]Z convergent operons also in centisome 12; both are adjacent to the argU tRNA gene; an ancestral sfmWYZ operon was apparently disrupted by the insertion of the DLP prophage, resulting in the loss of the sfmWY genes; fimI and STM05551 (between fimW and fimY) are specific to Salmonella. SfmA is one of 25 Fim homologs in E. coli K-12. The first 23 aa of SfmA are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b0530
sfmC	fimC(S.t.)	putative periplasmic pilus chaperone	Putative factor; Surface structures	Predicted periplasmic pilus chaperone	The sfmACDHF-sfmZ genes in centisome 12 are a remnant of a region that is orthologous to the Salmonella enterica fimA[I]CDHF-fim[WY]Z convergent operons also in centisome 12; both are adjacent to the argU tRNA gene; an ancestral sfmWYZ operon was apparently disrupted by the insertion of the DLP prophage, resulting in the loss of the sfmWY genes; fimI and STM05551 (between fimW and fimY) are specific to Salmonella. SfmC has Ig-like domains: pfam PF00345 aligns to N-terminal residues 32-145, and pfam PF02753 aligns to C-terminal residues 151-224. The first 23 aa of SfmC are a predicted type I signal peptide.	b0531
sfmD	fimD(S.t.)	putative outer membrane export usher protein	Membrane; Outer membrane constituents	Predicted outer membrane fimbrial subunit export usher protein	The sfmACDHF-sfmZ genes in centisome 12 are a remnant of a region that is orthologous to the Salmonella enterica fimA[I]CDHF-fim[WY]Z convergent operons also in centisome 12; both are adjacent to the argU tRNA gene; an ancestral sfmWYZ operon was apparently disrupted by the insertion of the DLP prophage, resulting in the loss of the sfmWY genes; fimI and STM05551 (between fimW and fimY) are specific to Salmonella. The first 35 aa od SfmD are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b0532
sfmH	fimH(S.t.)	FimA homolog, function unknown	Putative structural component; Surface structures	FimA homolog	The sfmACDHF-sfmZ genes in centisome 12 are a remnant of a region that is orthologous to the Salmonella enterica fimA[I]CDHF-fim[WY]Z convergent operons also in centisome 12; both are adjacent to the argU tRNA gene; an ancestral sfmWYZ operon was apparently disrupted by the insertion of the DLP prophage, resulting in the loss of the sfmWY genes; fimI and STM05551 (between fimW and fimY) are specific to Salmonella. SfmH is one of 25 FimA homologs in E. coli K-12. The first 24 aa of SfmH are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b0533
iraM	elb1, elbA, ycgW	RpoS stabilzer during Mg starvation, anti-RssB factor	Null	RpoS stabilzer during Mg starvation, anti-RssB factor; anti-adapter protein	IraM(ElbA) is involved in isoprenoid biosynthesis (Hemmi, 1998). IraM is 40% identical to S. typhimurium RssC (Bougdour, 2008).	b1160
bluR	ycgE	repressor of blue light-responsive genes	Putative regulator; Not classified	Repressor of blue light-responsive genes; modulates biofilm with a YmgAB to RcsBCD relay	A lon bluR(ycgE) double mutant is multidrug resistant and has lowered ompF (Duval, 2009). BluR(YcgE) has a MerR-like HTH DNA binding domain. BluR(YcgE) and its blue light-responsive anti-represssor BluF(YcgF) control a regulon of eight small proteins, including the RcsBCD activators YmgAB (Tschowri, 2009).	b1162
bluF	ycgF	anti-repressor for YcgE, blue light-responsive; FAD-binding; inactive c-di-GMP phosphodiesterase-like EAL domain protein	Null	Anti-repressor for BluR(YcgE), blue light-responsive; cold shock gene, binds FAD; photoinduced dimerization	BluF(YcgF) has an N-terminal blue light-responsive FAD-binding BLUF domain and a defective C-terminal cyclic-di-GMP phosphodiesterase EAL domain, but does not degrade c-di-GMP, nor does c-di-GMP appear to regulate the BluF(YcgF)-responsive genes (Sommerfeldt, 2009; Tschowri, 2009). Light induces a conformational change and dimerization of BluF(YcgF) (Terazima, 2011). The cold-inducibility of bluF(ycgF) is dependent on the presence of the pnp gene. 	b1163
ycgG	None	putative membrane-anchored cyclic-di-GMP phosphodiesterase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Predicted membrane-anchored cyclic-di-GMP phosphodiesterase	YcgG consistently co-purifies with the degradosome. YcgG has an N-terminal predicted periplasmic CSS domain (PF12792) flanked by two TM segments and has a C-terminal cytoplasmic EAL PDE domain. ycgG expression is only RpoS-dependent when grown in 0.3 M NaCl, not in stationary phase (Weber, 2006).	b1168
ycgH'	None	pseudogene	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction	ycgH has an in-frame stop codon at codon 507 and has a frameshift caused by a one basepair deletion in codon 859.	b4491
ycgI'	ymgH	pseudogene	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction, autotransporter homolog; C-terminal fragment	An apparent frameshift at codon 37 was hypothetically reconstructed with an X. This partial sequence closely matches the end of YpjA and many other OM pertactin-related autotransporters.	b4521
ycgJ	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Function unknown, Fels-1 prophage protein family	First 24 aa are predicted to be a type I signal peptide, but there is also an alternate predicted cut site after residue 22.	b1177
pliG	ycgK	periplasmic inhibitor of g-type lysozyme	Null	Inhibitor of g-type lysozyme, periplasmic	E. coli K-12 has three vertebrate lysozyme inhibitors, the two c-type (chicken) inhibitors membrane-bound MliC and periplamsic Ivy, and one g-type (goose) inhibitor PliG (Vanderkelen. 2010). The first 22 aa of PliG are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b1178
ycgL	None	UPF0745 family protein	Null	UPF0745 family protein, function unknown; low abundance protein	Although the YcgL PDB structure 2H7A is derived from E. coli strain CFT073, it is idetical to K-12 YgcL. 8/20 YcgL peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is not removed (Maillet, 2007).	b1179
ycgM	None	putative isomerase/hydrolase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Function unknown	Null	b1180
ycgN	None	UPF0153 family cysteine cluster protein	Null	UPF0153 cysteine cluster protein	YcgN, YkgJ and YeiW are members of the UPF0153 family and have multiple conserved Cys residues, including an N-terminal CXX(X)CGXCC motif that may be involved in metal binding. YcgN is longer than the other two E. coli K-12 UPF0153 proteins and the UPF0260 profile encompasses the additional residues in YcgN. The UPF0153 family matches the Pfam PF03692 profile that appears to have been mislabeled as a FliB profile.	b1181
cvrA	ycgO	putative cation/proton antiporter	Null	Required for growth at low osmolarity; similar to eukaryotic Na+/H+ exchangers, but not involved in Na+ extrusion; proposed to be involved in the regulation of cell volume	Null	b1191
emtA	mltE, sltZ, ycgP	lytic murein endotransglycosylase E	Enzyme; Murein sacculus, peptidoglycan	Membrane-bound lytic transglycosylase E, lipoprotein; involved in limited murein hydrolysis	EmtA(MltE) is an endolytic transglycosylase and an exolytic transglycosylase that can degrade non-crosslinked murein chains (Lee, 2013). The first 15 aa of EmtA are a type II signal peptide. 	b1193
ldcA	ycgQ	murein tetrapeptide carboxypeptidase; LD-carboxypeptidase A	Enzyme; Murein sacculus, peptidoglycan	Murein tetrapeptide carboxypeptidase; LD-carboxypeptidase A; cytoplasmic protease that cleaves the terminal D-alanine from cytoplasmic muropeptides	LdcA mutants can lyse in stationary phase (Templin, 1999; Herve, 2007).	b1192
ycgR	None	flagellar velocity braking protein, c-di-GMP-regulated	Null	Flagellar velocity braking protein, c-di-GMP-regulated	YcgR, with bound c-di-GMP, interacts with the FliG rotor, the FliM motor switch protein, and the MotA stator to impede flagellar rotation speed, acting as a molecular backstop brake limiting swimming velocity and ATP consumption (Boehm, 2010; Paul, 2010). Mutations in ycgR suppress the motility defects of hns and yhjH mutations (Ryjenkov, 2006; Girgis, 2007). YcgR contains a C-terminal PilZ domain, which binds cyclic-di-GMP; binding of cyclic-di-GMP is involved in motility regulation. FlhDC flagellar regulon.	b1194
dhaL	dhaK2, ptsD, ycgS	dihydroxyacetone kinase, C-terminal domain	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Dihydroxyacetone kinase, PTS-dependent ADP-binding subunit II; DhaK(2):DhaL:DhaM(2) complex	DhaL is similar to C-terminal half of single protein DHA kinases. Phosphoryl donor is DhaM, not ATP. DhaK is a activator of DhaR.	b1199
dhaK	dhaK1, ptsD, ycgT	dihydroxyacetone kinase, PTS-dependent, dihydroxyacetone-binding subunit	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Dihydroxyacetone kinase, PTS-dependent, dihydroxyacetone-binding subunit; DhaK(2):DhaL:DhaM(2) complex	DhaK is similar to N-terminal half of single protein DHA kinases. DhaK is a co-repressor of DhaR. Phosphoryl donor is DhaM, not ATP. His218 forms covalent hemiaminal linkage to dihydroxyacetone.	b1200
dhaR	ptsD, ycgU	dhaKLM operon transcription activator	Putative regulator; Not classified	Transcription activator of the dhaKLM operon	DhaR is an auto-repressor of dhaR transcription. DhaL and DhaK are co-activator and co-repressor, respectively, of DhaR. AAA(+) family.	b1201
ycgV	None	putative adhesin	Putative factor; Not classified	Overexpression increases adhesion and biofilm formation; probable adhesin, function unknown	Null	b1202
yciS	lapA	DUF1049 family inner membrane protein, function unknown	Null	DUF1049 family inner membrane protein	YciS is predicted to have two TM segments; the first segment may be erroneously predicted to be a type II signal peptide prediction.	b1279
yciT	deoT	global regulator of transcription; DeoR family	Putative regulator; Not classified	Global regulator of transcription, DeoR family	yciT(deoT) and yciZ(deoL) are co-transcribed and constitute an operon (Elgrably-Weiss, 2006). deoT stands for deoR-Type based on its homology to DeoR, and deoL stands for deoT leader peptide (Elgrably-Weiss, 2006). However, deo is reserved for genes known to be involved in deoxyribose metabolism, so deoT and deoL are designated as synonyms.	b1284
mpaA	ycjI	murein peptide amidase A	Enzyme; Not classified	Murein peptide amidase A; murein tripeptide hydrolysis, cleaves glutamyl-DAP bond	MpaA is the cytoplasmic enzyme responsible for the degradation of murein tri-peptides but not tetra-peptides, which must first be converted to tri-peptides by LdcA; both tetra- and tri-peptides are imported into the cytoplasm with high afinity by MppA which allows for the recycling of endogenous murein peptides from the periplasm and for the utilization of exogenous murein peptides from other bacteria imported into the periplasm via OppBCDF (Maqbool, 2012). PgrR(YjcZ) is a global regulator involved in murein peptide degradation specifically acting as a transcriptional repressor for the downstream mppA gene and for the divergent ycjY-ymjD'-ymjC'-mpaA defective operon; PgrR is proposed to be involved in the switch decision to recycle or degrade murein peptides; additional genes at distal loci are also regulated by PgrR (Shimada, 2013). otherPDB (V. harveyi): 4AXV (Maqbool, 2012).	b1326
puuP	ycjJ	putrescine importer	Transport; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Putrescine importer	PuuP is required for growth on putrescine as a sole carbon or nitrogen source (Kurihara, 2009; Schneider, 2012). 	b1296
puuA	ycjK	glutamate--putrescine ligase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Glutamate--putrescine ligase; putrescine utilization pathway	puuA is transiently induced after a cold shock.	b1297
puuD	ycjL	gamma-glutamyl-gamma-aminobutyrate hydrolase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Gamma-glutamyl-gamma-aminobutyrate hydrolase, putrescine utilization pathway	C114 is the active site. Induced by putrescine.	b1298
ycjM	None	alpha amylase catalytic domain family protein	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Alpha-amylase catalytic domain family protein; function unknown	ycjM is part of the putative ycjM-V operon, which encodes a putative transport and catabolism system for an unknown sugar.	b1309
ycjN	None	putative ABC sugar transporter periplasmic binding protein	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein; verified lipoprotein	The first 20 aa of YcjN are a type II signal peptide. ycjN is part of the putative ycjM-V operon, which encodes a putative transport and catabolism system for an unknown sugar.	b1310
ycjO	None	putative sugar ABC transporter permease	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative ABC transporter permease,	ycjO is part of the putative ycjM-V operon, which encodes a putative transport and catabolism system for an unknown sugar.	b1311
ycjP	None	putative sugar ABC transporter permease	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative ABC transporter permease	ycjP is part of the putative ycjM-V operon, which encodes a putative transport and catabolism system for an unknown sugar.	b1312
ycjQ	None	putative Zn-dependent NAD(P)-binding oxidoreductase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Predicted alcohol dehydrogenase, function unknown	ycjQ is part of the putative ycjM-V operon, which encodes a putative transport and catabolism system for an unknown sugar.	b1313
ycjR	None	putative TIM alpha/beta barrel enzyme	Putative factor; Not classified	Predicted TIM alpha/beta barrel enzyme, sugar isomerase homolog	YcjR can be modified by lysine acetylation in vitro using purified E. coli Pka(YfiQ) (Thao, 2010). ycjR is part of the putative ycjM-V operon, which encodes a putative transport and catabolism system for an unknown sugar.	b1314
ycjS	None	putative NADH-binding oxidoreductase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Putative oxidoreductase	ycjS is part of the putative ycjM-V operon, which encodes a putative transport and catabolism system for an unknown sugar.	b1315
ycjT	None	putative family 65 glycosyl hydrolase	Null	Predicted glycosyl hydrolase, family 65	In order to test if YcjT has maltose phosphorylase activity in vivo, a ycjT deletion mutant was examined: a ycjT mutant did not affect the induction of the matose regulon on lactose and the ycjT mutation did not affect growth on maltose, indicating that maltose is probably not a substrate for YcjT (Soupene, 2003). YcjT belongs to the glycosyl hydrolase 65 family with three corresponding Pfam domains: PF03633, Glyco_hydro_65C; PF03632, Glyco_hydro_65m; PF03636, Glyco_hydro_65N. ycjT is part of the putative ycjM-V operon, which encodes a putative transport and catabolism system for an unknown sugar.	b1316
ycjU	None	beta-phosphoglucomutase	Enzyme; Not classified	Beta-phosphoglucomutase; HAD11 family protein; lethality reduction protein	Mutations in ycjU have a hyperlethality phenotype when cells are stressed; YcjU is a protein that reduces the lethal effects of stress (Han, 2010). The beta-phosphoglucomutase activity was demonstrated in vitro (Kuznetsova, 2006). ycjU is part of the putative ycjM-V operon, which encodes a putative transport and catabolism system for an unknown sugar. HAD superfamily.	b1317
ycjV'	ymjB	pseudogene	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction, malK paralog	An apparent frameshift at codon 321 has been hypothetically reconstructed. ycjV is part of the putative ycjM-V operon, which encodes a putative transport and catabolism system for an unknown sugar.	b4524
ycjW	None	LacI family putative transcriptional repressor	Putative regulator; Not classified	Predicted LacI family transcriptional repressor; lethality reduction protein, required for swarming phenotype	Mutations in ycjW have a hyperlethality phenotype when cells are stressed; YcjW is a protein that reduces the lethal effects of stress (Han, 2010).	b1320
ycjX	None	DUF463 family protein, puatative P-loop NTPase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Predicted DUF463 family P-loop NTPase, heat-inducible	YcjX has been shown to be a heat shock protein and to be in the RpoH regulon (Nonaka, 2006; Rasouly, 2009). YcjX is induced during an unfolded protein response initiated with canavanine treatment (Rasouly, 2009).	b1321
ycjY	None	S9 homolog non-peptidase family protein	Null	S9 homolog non-peptidase family protein; possibly involved in recycling of murein peptides; no activity on model substrates detected	Over-expression of cloned ycjY induces filamentation (Burke, 2013). PgrR(YjcZ) is a global regulator involved in murein peptide degradation specifically acting as a transcriptional repressor for the downstream mppA gene and for the divergent ycjY-ymjD'-ymjC'-mpaA defective operon; PgrR is proposed to be involved in the switch decision to recycle or degrade murein peptides; additional genes at distal loci are also regulated by PgrR; YcjY had no activity on a panel of model peptidase substrates (Shimada, 2013). The MEROPS peptidase database has assigned YcjY to the S09.UNW non-peptidase homolog family.	b1327
pgrR	ycjZ	murein peptide degradation regulator	Regulator; Not classified	Murein peptide degradation regulator	PgrR(YjcZ) is a global regulator involved in murein peptide degradation specifically acting as a transcriptional repressor for the downstream mppA gene and for the divergent ycjY-ymjD'-ymjC'-mpaA defective operon; PgrR is proposed to be involved in the switch decision to recycle or degrade murein peptides; additional genes at distal loci are also regulated by PgrR (Shimada, 2013). PgrR(YjcZ) is required for swarming motility. LysR family.	b1328
ynaI	None	mechanosensitive channel protein, very small conductance	Null	Mechanosensitive channel protein, very small conductance	YnaI is a novel mechanosensitive channel protein of very low conductance (Edwards, 2012). EvgAS regulon. mscS, mscK(kefA), mscM(yjeP), ybiO, ybdG and ynaI are paralogs in the MscS family.	b1330
ydgD	None	putative peptidase	Null	Putative periplasmic serine protease	The first 21 aa of YdgD are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b1598
mdtI	ydgE	multidrug efflux system transporter	Putative factor; Not classified	Multidrug resistance efflux protein, with MdtJ; overexpression resistance to deoxycholate, SDS, nalidixic acid and fosfomycin	MdtI belongs to the SMR efflux pump family, DMT superfamily. MdtI has been topology mapped using protein fusions. MdtJI exports spermidine (Higashi, 2007).	b1599
mdtJ	ydgF	multidrug efflux system transporter	Putative factor; Not classified	Multidrug resistance efflux protein, with MdtI; overexpression resistance to deoxycholate, SDS, nalidixic acid and fosfomycin	MdtJ belongs to the SMR efflux pump family, DMT superfamily. Overexpression also reported to inhibit growth. MdtJI exports spermidine (Higashi, 2007).	b1600
tqsA	ydgG	pheromone AI-2 transporter	Putative transport; Not classified	Pheromone AI-2 transporter; mutants have increased intracellular AI-2 and decreased extracellular AI-2; controls biofilm formation	Induced during biofilm formation.	b1601
ydgH	None	DUF1471 family periplasmic protein	Null	DUF1471 family periplasmic tri-domain protein, function unknown	The first 22 aa of YdgH are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. otherPDB(S.typhimurium): 2M2J (Eletsky, 2014). otherPDB(S.typhimurium): 4EVU (Eletsky, 2014).	b1604
ydgI	arcD(P.a.)	putative arginine/ornithine antiporter transporter	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative arginine/ornithine antiporter	Null	b1605
ydgJ	None	putative oxidoreductase	Null	Putative oxidoreductase; yhhX paralog	Null	b1624
ydgK	rsxP	DUF2569 family inner membrane protein	Null	DUF2569 family inner membrane protein, function unknown	ydgK transcripts readthrough into the rsxABCDGE-nth operon (Gifford, 2000). The rsxA promoter is more than five-fold straonger than the the ydgK promoter (Koo, 2003). ydgK is not involved in the reduction of SoxR, but was called rsxP because its promoter contributes to rsx operon expression (Koo, 2003).	b1626
rsxA	rnfA(R.c.), ydgL	SoxR iron-sulfur cluster reduction factor component; inner membrane protein of electron transport complex	Null	SoxR iron-sulfur cluster reduction factor component; inner membrane protein of electron transport complex; probable ThiC reduction factor	RsxA has an opposite membrane topology from its paralog RsxA.	b1627
rsxB	rnfB(R.c.), ydgM	SoxR iron-sulfur cluster reduction factor component; putative iron-sulfur protein	Null	SoxR iron-sulfur cluster reduction factor component; predicted iron-sulfur protein; probable ThiC reduction factor	Null	b1628
rsxC	rnfC(R.c.), ydgN	SoxR iron-sulfur cluster reduction factor component; putative membrane-associated NADH oxidoreductase of electron transport complex 	Putative membrane; Not classified	SoxR iron-sulfur cluster reduction factor component; putative membrane-associated NADH oxidoreductase of electron transport complex; probable ThiC reduction factor	Null	b1629
rsxD	rnfD(R.c.), ydgO	SoxR iron-sulfur cluster reduction factor component; putative membrane protein of electron transport complex	Null	SoxR iron-sulfur cluster reduction factor component; putative membrane protein of electron transport complex; probable ThiC reduction factor	ApbE is probably required for a covalent flavination of conserved residues Thr187 in RsxD and Thr174 in RsxG with FMN, which then are likely to be required for the reduction of the 4Fe-4S cluster in ThiC in addition to the known Rsx function to reduce the 2Fe-2S cluster in SoxR. ApbE of Vibrio harveyi is a flavin transferase required for the covalent flavinylation of NqrC, an RsxG homolog, with FMN at position Thr229 (Bertsova, 2013). Vibrio cholerae RnfD (RsxD homolog) and RnfG (RsxG homolog) are covalently FMN flavinylated at residues Thr187 and Thr175, respectively (Backiel, 2008). Vibrio alginolyticus NqrC (RsxG homolog) and NqrB (RsxD homolog) are covalently FMN flavinylated at residues Thr223 and Thr235, respectively (Hayashi, 2001).	b1630
rsxG	rnfG(R.c.), ydgP	SoxR iron-sulfur cluster reduction factor component; putative membrane protein of electron transport complex	Null	SoxR iron-sulfur cluster reduction factor component; putative membrane protein of electron transport complex; probable ThiC reduction factor	ApbE is probably required for a covalent flavination of conserved residues Thr187 in RsxD and Thr174 in RsxG with FMN, which then are likely to be required for the reduction of the 4Fe-4S cluster in ThiC in addition to the known Rsx function to reduce the 2Fe-2S cluster in SoxR. ApbE of Vibrio harveyi is a flavin transferase required for the covalent flavinylation of NqrC, an RsxG homolog, with FMN at position Thr229 (Bertsova, 2013). Vibrio cholerae RnfD (RsxD homolog) and RnfG (RsxG homolog) are covalently FMN flavinylated at residues Thr187 and Thr175, respectively (Backiel, 2008). Vibrio alginolyticus NqrC (RsxG homolog) and NqrB (RsxD homolog) are covalently FMN flavinylated at residues Thr223 and Thr235, respectively (Hayashi, 2001).	b1631
rsxE	rnfE(R.c.), ydgQ	SoxR iron-sulfur cluster reduction factor component; electron transport inner membrane NADH-quinone reductase	Null	SoxR iron-sulfur cluster reduction factor component; electron transport inner membrane NADH-quinone reductase; probable ThiC reduction factor	RsxA paralog has an opposite membrane topology from RsxE.	b1632
dtpA	tppB, ydgR	dipeptide and tripeptide permease A	Transport; Not classified	Dipeptide and tripeptide permease A	Overexpression increases di- and tri-peptide transport and confers hypersensitivity to alafosfalin (Weitz, 2006). DtpA(TppB) was originally characterized in S. typhimurium. OmpR regulon. dtpA(tppB) is weakly stimulated by anaerobiosis in E. coli; Salmonella dtpA(tppB) is strongly stimulated by anaerobiosis. dtpA(tppB) in both species is not regulated by osmolarity. Salmonella dtpA(tppA) regulatory mutations were shown to be ompR mutations. Salmonella dtpA(tppB) mutants are resistant to the tripeptide antibiotic alafosfalin and cannot satisfy a leucine requirement with trileucine (Gibson, 1984). Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS).	b1634
pdxY	ydgS	pyridoxamine kinase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Pyridoxine	Pyridoxamine kinase	Involved in the salvage pathway of pyridoxal 5'-phosphate biosynthesis.	b1636
anmK	ydhH	anhydro-N-acetylmuramic acid kinase	Enzyme; Murein recycling	Anhydro-N-acetylmuramic acid kinase, murein recycling	An anmK deletion strain grows normally (Uehara, 2005). The anmK-slyB divergent promoter region binds FNR (Federowicz, 2014).	b1640
ydhI	None	DUF1656 family putative inner membrane efflux pump associated protein	Null	Predicted inner membrane DUF1656 family protein; efflux pump associated; function unknown	YtcA, AaeX and YdhI are DUF1656 family (Pfam PF07869) predicted inner membrane proteins; all these E. coli DUF1656 family proteins are encoded in the first genes of known or predicted efflux pump operons, preceding the membrane fusion protein genes. The slyA-ydhIJK divergent promoter region binds FNR and ydhIJK operon expression is activated by FNR (Federowicz, 2014).	b1643
ydhJ	None	putative membrane fusion protein (MFP) of YdhJK efflux pump	Putative membrane; Not classified	Predicted membrane fusion protein (MFP) of YdhJK efflux pump; function unknown	YdhJ has a putative signal anchor. The slyA-ydhIJK divergent promoter region binds FNR and ydhIJK operon expression is activated by FNR (Federowicz, 2014). Overexpression of YdhJ causes abnormal biofilm architecture and reduced motility (Tenorio, 2003).	b1644
ydhK	None	putative efflux protein (PET) component of YdhJK efflux pump	Null	Efflux protein family (PET) component of predicted YdhJK efflux pump, function unknown	The slyA-ydhIJK divergent promoter region binds FNR and ydhIJK operon expression is activated by FNR (Federowicz, 2014). YdhK is similar to B. cepacia fusaric acid resistance protein FusC. The ydhK gene is paralogous to aaeB.	b1645
ydhL	None	DUF1289 family protein	Null	DUF1289 family protein, function unknown	Null	b1648
nemR	ydhM	transcriptional repressor for the nemRA-gloA operon, quinone-, glyoxal-, and HOCl-activated	Null	nemRA-gloA operon repressor; quinone-, glyoxal-, and HOCl-activated	NemR is a redox-regulated transcriptional repressor that has HOCl-sensitive cysteine residues used to respond to bleach and other reactive chlorine species (Gray, 2013). nemR is part of the nemRA-gloA operon involved in electrophile detoxification; the NemR represssor is released from DNA upon sensing quinones and glyoxals (Lee, 2013). nemR mutants suppress the putative malonic semialdehyde reductase defects of rutE or ydfG mutants, presuambly by overproducing NemA (Kim, 2010). NemR is inactivated by NEM and other Cys modification reagents (Umezawa, 2008). TetR family.	b1649
yobD	None	UPF0266 family inner membrane protein	Null	Inner membrane protein, UPF0266 family, function unknown	Null	b1820
mepH	ydhO	murein DD-endopeptidase, space-maker hydrolase	Enzyme; Murein sacculus, peptidoglycan	Murein DD-endopeptidase, space-maker hydrolase	The periplasmic protein MepH(YdhO) is one of three D-alanine-meso-DAP specific murein DD-endopeptidases, including MepS(Spr) and MepM(YebA), which are the long predicted space-maker hydrolases needed to cleave peptide cross-bridges in murein so that the murein sacculus can be elongated by murein synthases; MepH(YdhO) can act on intact murein sacculi and soluble cross-linked muropeptide dimers; cloned mepH(ydhO) complements a mepS(spr) deletion; an mepS(spr)-mepH(ydhO)-mepM(yebA) triple mutation is lethal (Singh, 2012). MepS(Spr), NlpC, YafL and MepH(YdhO) are paralogous members of the NlpC/P60 peptidase superfamily (Pfam entry: PF00877). The first 27 aa of MepH(YdhO) are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. The spr, yebA, and ydhO genes have been renamed as mepS, mepM, and mepH, respectively (M. Reddy, personal communication).	b1655
ydhP	None	putative MFS transporter, inner membrane protein	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative MFS transporter, function unknown; inner membrane protein	YdhP is a member of the Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS) of transporters.	b1657
ydhQ	None	autotransporter adhesin-related protein	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Autotransporter adhesin-related protein, function unknown	Although related to autotransporter adhesins like AidA, YdhQ is probably not an autotransporter but it may be an adhesin; YdhQ does not have a signal peptide.	b1664
ydhR	None	putative monooxygenase	Null	Predicted monooxygenase, function unknown; dimeric	YdhR is structurally similar to YgiN and the ActVA-Orf6 hydroxyquinone monooxygenase. YdhR codon usage indicates a foreign gene, consistent with its location next to the valVW tRNA locus. Neighboring ydhS does not appear to be a foreign gene.	b1667
ydhS	None	putative oxidoreductase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Predicted oxidoreductase with FAD/NAD(P)-binding domain	YdhS is predicted to have an N-terminal FAD/NAD(P) binding site (PF07992).	b1668
ydhT	None	FNR, Nar, NarP-regulated protein; putative subunit of YdhYVWXUT oxidoreductase complex	Null	FNR, Nar, NarP-regulated protein; putative subunit of YdhYVWXUT oxidoreductase complex	YdhYVWXUT may constitute a novel oxidoreductase system possibly involved in anaerobic sulfur metabolism (Partridge, 2008).	b1669
ydhU	None	putative cytochrome b subunit of YdhYVWXUT oxidoreductase complex	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Predicted cytochrome b integral membrane protein; FNR, Nar, NarP-regulated protein; putative subunit of YdhYVWXUT oxidoreductase complex	YdhYVWXUT may constitute a novel oxidoreductase system possibly involved in anaerobic sulfur metabolism (Partridge, 2008). YdhU is homologous to Salmonella PhsC.	b1670
ydhV	None	putative oxidoreductase subunit	Null	Predicted oxidoreductase, FNR, NarL, NarP regulated protein; putative subunit of YdhYVWXUT oxidoreductase complex	YdhV is related to aldehyde/formaldehyde ferredoxin oxidoreductases. YdhYVWXUT may constitute a novel oxidoreductase system possibly involved in anaerobic sulfur metabolism (Partridge, 2008).	b1673
ydhW	None	FNR, Nar, NarP-regulated protein; putative subunit of YdhYVWXUT oxidoreductase complex	Null	FNR, Nar, NarP-regulated protein; putative subunit of YdhYVWXUT oxidoreductase complex	YdhYVWXUT may constitute a novel oxidoreductase system possibly involved in anaerobic sulfur metabolism (Partridge, 2008).	b1672
ydhX	None	putative 4Fe-4S ferridoxin-type protein; FNR, Nar, NarP-regulated protein; putative subunit of YdhYVWXUT oxidoreductase complex	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Ferredoxin-like protein; FNR, Nar, NarP-regulated protein; putative subunit of YdhYVWXUT oxidoreductase complex	YdhYVWXUT may constitute a novel oxidoreductase system possibly involved in anaerobic sulfur metabolism (Partridge, 2008). Verified Tat substrate: YdhX has a Tat/Sec (Class II) predicted 27 aa signal peptide (Tullman-Ercek, 2007).	b1671
ydhY	None	putative 4Fe-4S ferridoxin-type protein; FNR, Nar, NarP-regulated protein; putative subunit of YdhYVWXUT oxidoreductase complex	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Ferredoxin-like protein; FNR, NarL, NarP-regulated protein; putative subunit of YdhYVWXUT oxidoreductase complex	YdhYVWXUT may constitute a novel oxidoreductase system possibly involved in anaerobic sulfur metabolism (Partridge, 2008).	b1674
ydhZ	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Function unknown	Null	b1675
sufE	ynhA	sulfur acceptor protein	Null	Binds and stimulates SufS activity; in sufABCDSE operon involved in iron-sulfur center formation of FhuF; homodimeric	SufE is homologous to CsdE, encoded by the gene downstream of csdA.	b1679
sufS	csdB, ynhB	cysteine desulfurase, stimulated by SufE; selenocysteine lyase, PLP-dependent	Null	Cysteine desulfurase, stimulated by SufE; selenocysteine lyase	 Fur regulon. SufS(CsdB) is in the sufABCDSE operon involved in iron-sulfur center formation of FhuF. SufS is a NifS homolog. 	b1680
sufD	ynhC	component of SufBCD Fe-S cluster assembly scaffold	Null	SufBCD Fe-S assembly scaffold, FADH2-dependent	SufBCD mobilizes sulfur from the SufSE cysteine desulfurase, exists in 1:2:1(B:C:D) stoichimometry, assembles and transfers a [4E-4S] cluster to target proteins, and utilizes FADH2 as a cofactor (Wollers, 2010). SufB and SufD are paralogs. 13/203 SufD(YnhC) peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed (Maillet, 2007). sufD is in the sufABCDSE operon involved in iron-sulfur center formation of FhuF.	b1681
sufC	ynhD	SufBCD Fe-S cluster assembly scaffold protein, ATP-binding protein	Null	SufBCD Fe-S cluster assembly scaffold protein, ATP-binding protein	SufBCD mobilizes sulfur from the SufSE cysteine desulfurase, exists in 1:2:1(B:C:D) stoichimometry, assembles and transfers a [4E-4S] cluster to target proteins, and utilizes FADH2 as a cofactor (Wollers, 2010). sufC is in the sufABCDSE operon involved in iron-sulfur center formation of FhuF.	b1682
sufB	ynhE	component of SufBCD Fe-S cluster assembly scaffold	Null	SufBCD Fe-S assembly scaffold, FADH2-dependent	SufBCD mobilizes sulfur from the SufSE cysteine desulfurase, exists in 1:2:1(B:C:D) stoichimometry, assembles and transfers a [4E-4S] cluster to target proteins, and utilizes FADH2 as a cofactor (Wollers, 2010). sufB is in the sufABCDSE operon involved in iron-sulfur center formation of FhuF.	b1683
ydiH	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Function unknown	Null	b1685
menI	ydiI	1,4-dihydroxy-2-naphthoyl-CoA hydrolase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Menaquinone, ubiquinone	DHNA-CoA thioesterase, menaquinone biosynthesis; 1,4-dihydroxy-2-naphthoyl-CoA hydrolase	Overexpression of menI(ydiI) expels plasmids (Wang, 2014). MenI(YdiI) has the DHNA-CoA thioesterase activity required for the step after MenB in menaquinone biosynthesis; menI(ydiI) mutants have one third the normal level of menaquinone; MenH or other thioesterases may be responsible for the residual menaquinone, partially compensating for the loss of MenI(YdiI) (Chen, 2013). MenI(YdiI) exhibits Acyl-CoA esterase activity in vitro (Kuznetsova, 2005). MenI(YdiI) is a member of the HotDog superfamily of thioesterases and dehydratases (Pfam CL0050, PF03061; PDB 1VI8, 1VH5) (Dillon, 2004; Badger, 2005). menI(ydiI) clusters with other men genes and ubiE (gene neighborhood and co-occurrence) using the STRING server (string-db.org) (Franceschini, 2013).	b1686
ydiJ	None	putative FAD-linked oxidoreductase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Predicted FAD-linked oxidoreductase, function unknown	Overexpression causes abnormal biofilm architecture, increased crystal violet staining, and reduced motility. YdiJ is homologous to glycolate oxidase. P. putida ydiJ mutant is unaffected for growth and survival.	b1687
ydiK	None	UPF0118 family inner membrane protein	Null	Inner membrane protein, UPF0118 family; has predicted PurR box	Probable false positive lipoprotein prediction, Cys not conserved, 9 CM TMs predicted.	b1688
ydiL	None	putative HTH domain DNA-binding protein	Null	Putative HTH domain DNA-binding protein; lambda repressor-like protein	The InterPro YdiL-like domain profile IPR027910 proteins are a subset of the IPR010982 phage lambda repressor-like DNA-binding domain proteins.	b1689
ydiM	None	putative MFS transporter, membrane protein	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative MFS transporter, function unknown; inner membrane protein	YdiM is a member of the Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS) of transporters. When testing candidate drug efflux no overexpression resistances were found for YdiM (Nishino, 2001).	b1690
ydiN	None	putative MFS transporter, membrane protein	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative MFS transporter, function unknown; inner membrane protein; upregulated in shikimate-producer during carbon starvation	YdiN is a member of the Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS) of transporters. YdiN is upregulated in shikimate-producer during carbon starvation (Johansson, 2006). ydiN is in an operon with shikimate genes ydiB and aroD. YdiN may be involved in the transport of shikimate or byproducts (quinic acid and 3-dehydroshikimic acid) of its overproduction: a second transport system for shikimate has not yet been mapped (Brown, 1976; Knop, 2001).	b1691
ydiO	None	putative acyl-CoA dehydrogenase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Predicted acyl-CoA dehydrogenase, function unknown	The function of a putative YdiO, YdiQ, YdiR, YdiS, and YdiT system has been hypothesized to be the transport of electrons between anaerobic fatty acid oxidation pathway and the respiratory chain (Campbell, 2003).	b1695
ydiP	None	putative DNA-binding transcriptional regulator	Putative regulator; Not classified	AraC family transcriptional activator, function unknown	Null	b1696
ydiQ	None	putative electron transfer flavoprotein subunit	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Predicted electron transfer flavoprotein subunit; function unknown	The function of a putative YdiO, YdiQ, YdiR, YdiS, and YdiT system has been hypothesized to be the transport of electrons between anaerobic fatty acid oxidation pathway and the respiratory chain (Campbell, 2003). YdiQ and YdiR are predicted to form a heterodimer (Campbell, 2003). YdiS may accept electrons from YdiQR and reduce a quinone.	b1697
ydiR	None	putative electron transfer flavoprotein, FAD-binding subunit	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Predicted electron transfer flavoprotein subunit; function unknown	The function of a putative YdiO, YdiQ, YdiR, YdiS, and YdiT system has been hypothesized to be the transport of electrons between anaerobic fatty acid oxidation pathway and the respiratory chain (Campbell, 2003). YdiQ and YdiR are predicted to form a heterodimer (Campbell, 2003). YdiS may accept electrons from YdiQR and reduce a quinone.	b1698
ydiS	None	putative oxidoreductase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Predicted electron transfer flavoprotein-quinone oxidoreductase; predicted FAD-binding domain; function unknown	The function of a putative YdiO, YdiQ, YdiR, YdiS, and YdiT system has been hypothesized to be the transport of electrons between anaerobic fatty acid oxidation pathway and the respiratory chain (Campbell, 2003). fixC, ydiS and ygcN are paralogs. YdiS may accept electrons from YdiQR and reduce a quinone.	b1699
ydiT	None	putative 3Fe-4S ferredoxin-type protein	Null	Ferredoxin-like protein, function unknown	The function of a putative YdiO, YdiQ, YdiR, YdiS, and YdiT system has been hypothesized to be the transport of electrons between anaerobic fatty acid oxidation pathway and the respiratory chain (Campbell, 2003).	b1700
ydiU	None	UPF0061 family protein	Null	Function unknown, UPF0061 family	Null	b1706
ydiV	cdgR(S.t.)	anti-FlhD4C2 factor, inactive EAL family phosphodiesterase	Null	Anti-FlhD4C2 factor, inactive EAL family phosphodiesterase; mutation decreases cAMP levels in an sdiA mutant; pheromone AI-1-responsive gene	YdiV can act as an anti-FlhD4C2 factor in vitro, binding FlhD4C2 by binding FlhD and blocking FlhD4C2 activation of the flagellar regulon; YdiV of E. coli K-12 is poorly translated, explaining why E. coli K-12 does not have reduced motility at low nutrient concentrations mediated by YdiV and alleviated by fliZ mutation as observed for Salmonella (Wada, 2011; Wada, 2012). YdiV was named CdgR and characterized in Salmonella typhimurium wildtype strain ATCC 14028 as a protein required for the bacterium to resist host phagocyte oxidase in vivo; a Salmonella typhimurium ATCC 14028 cdgR(ydiV) mutant is reported to have seven-fold higher c-di-GMP levels (Hisert, 2005). However, in contrast to previously published results, a Salmonella typhimurium ATCC 14028 ydiV(cdgR,STM1344) mutant was found to have a lowered intracellular c-di-GMP and overexpression of ydiV(cdgR,STM1344) increased intracellular c-di-GMP, which may be attributable to differences in the c-di-GMP assay (soluble lysate vs total cell extraction); Salmonella typhimurium YdiV is a single domain EAL protein lacking phosphodiesterase, diguanylate cyclase, or c-di-GMP binding activity; YdiV(STM1344) is positive regulator of csgD transcription (Simm, 2009). In Salmonella typhimurium laboratory strain LT2 neither a ydiV mutation nor overexpression significantly affected c-di-GMP levels (Wada, 2011). Extracellular AI-1 stimulates ydiV RNA expression in an SdiA-dependent manner (Zhou, 2008). An sdiA ydiV double mutant has twofold reduced cAMP levels than inhibit quorum sensing system 2 (Zhou, 2008). ydiV RNA is 3.5-fold up-regulated by RpoS at ph 5 (Weber, 2006).	b1707
arpB'	ydiW, ydiX	pseudogene, ankyrin repeats	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction, ankyrin repeats	A frameshift at codon 142 is translated as an X in the reconstructed protein sequence. An intact allele is present in O157:H7 EDL933 as Z2749, which has K142.	b4494
ydiY	None	acid-inducible putative outer membrane protein	Null	Predicted outer membrane protein, acid-inducible; function unknow	The first 25 aa are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b1722
ydiZ	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Function unknown	Null	b1724
yniA	None	fructosamine kinase family protein	Null	Fructosamine kinase family protein, function unknown	YniA is homolgous to fructosamine and ketosamine kinases (Pfam PF03881). YniA in vitro activity was tested with numerous substrates but no kinase activity was detected (Gemayel, 2007).	b1725
yniB	None	putative inner membrane protein	Null	Predicted inner membrane protein, function unknown	YniB has three predicted transmembrane helicies and is the prototype for a family of integral membrane proteins (Pfam PF14002).	b1726
yniC	None	2-deoxyglucose-6-P phosphatase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	2-deoxyglucose-6-P phosphatase; mutants are hypersensitive to 2-deoxyglucose; overproduction confers 2-deoxyglucose resistance; additional in vitro substrates: mannose-6-P phosphate, 2-deoxyribose-5-P, ribose-5-P, glucose-6-P; HAD1	In vitro activities and phenotypes demonstrated by Kuznetsova et al. (2005, 2006). HAD superfamily. HT_Cmplx36_Cyt: Mog+YniC.	b1727
ydjM	None	inner membrane protein regulated by LexA	Null	Inner membrane protein, LexA regulated, function unknown	Null	b1728
ydjN	None	putative transporter	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Predicted symporter, function unknown	ydjN is probably in the PurR regulon (weak support) (Marbach, 2012).	b1729
ydjO	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Function unknown	Null	b1730
cedA	ydjP	cell division modulator	Null	DNA-binding protein that modulates cell division; relieves inhibition of cell division after over-replication of chromosome in dnaAcos mutants	Second ATG is chosen because of S.t. alignment and RBS. N-terminus of 87 aa protein is unstructured by NMR, consistent with an incorrect N-terminus.	b1731
cho	dinM, sosD, ydjQ	endonuclease of nucleotide excision repair	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Endonuclease involved in excision repair, cuts 3' of lesion; requires UvrAB	Homologous to N-terminal domain of UvrC. LexA regulon.	b1741
ves	ydjR	cold- and stress-inducible protein	Null	Cold- and stress-inducible protein, function unknown	ves is a non-essential gene. The C-terminus of Ves is homologus to the CspA family.	b1742
astE	ydjS	succinylglutamate desuccinylase	Enzyme; Not classified	Succinylglutamate desuccinylase, arginine catabolism	Null	b1744
astB	ydjT	succinylarginine dihydrolase	Enzyme; Not classified	Succinylarginine dihydrolase, arginine catabolism	Null	b1745
astD	ydjU	succinylglutamic semialdehyde dehydrogenase	Enzyme; Not classified	Succinylglutamic semialdehyde dehydrogenase, NAD-dependent; arginine catabolism	AstD is also a decanal or succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase.	b1746
astA	ydjV	arginine succinyltransferase	Enzyme; Not classified	Arginine succinyltransferase, arginine catabolism	Repressed during biofilm formation.	b1747
astC	argM, cstC, ydjW	succinylornithine transaminase, PLP-dependent	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Arginine	Succinylornithine transaminase, arginine catabolism; carbon starvation protein	An astC mutant cannot catabolize arginine and AstC overproduction complements argD mutants.	b1748
ydjX	None	TVP38/TMEM64 family inner membrane protein	Null	TVP38/TMEM64 family inner membrane protein, function unknown	The E. coli K-12 DedA superfamily (SNARE associated Golgi protein/PF09335) has eight paralogs in two families, the COG0586 DedA/YghB family (including the DedA/YabI/YohD subfamily and the general envelope maintenance protein YghB/YqjA subfamily) and the YdjX family (including the COG0398 TVP38/TMEM64 YdjX/YdjZ subfamily and the COG1238 YqaA subfamily) (Doerrler, 2013; K.E.R.). The ydjXYZ-ynjABCD operon promoter region binds FNR and ydjXYZ-ynjABCD operon expression is activated by FNR (Federowicz, 2014).	b1750
ydjY	None	putative ferrodoxin-like lipoprotein	Null	Putative ferrodoxin-like lipoprotein, function unknown	YdjY is a predicted lipoprotein with a putative (variant) 4Fe-4S ferredoxin-type domain (161-199 aa) detected with InterPro profile IPR017896; the putative Fe-S domain of YdjY does not match other ferrodoxin-like 4Fe-4S profiles very well, including a very weak hit to one of the Fe-S cluster regions of HycB and a weak hit to Pfam profile Fer4_21 (PF14697); it hits PROSITE profile 4FE4S_FER_2 (PS51379). The first 26 aa of YdjY are predicted to be a type II signal peptide. The ydjXYZ-ynjABCD operon promoter region binds FNR and ydjXYZ-ynjABCD operon expression is activated by FNR (Federowicz, 2014).	b1751
ydjZ	None	TVP38/TMEM64 family inner membrane protein	Null	TVP38/TMEM64 family inner membrane protein, function unknown	The E. coli K-12 DedA superfamily (SNARE associated Golgi protein/PF09335) has eight paralogs in two families, the COG0586 DedA/YghB family (including the DedA/YabI/YohD subfamily and the general envelope maintenance protein YghB/YqjA subfamily) and the YdjX family (including the COG0398 YdjX/YdjZ TVP38/TMEM64 subfamily and the COG1238 YqaA subfamily) (Doerrler, 2013; K.E.R.). The ydjXYZ-ynjABCD operon promoter region binds FNR and ydjXYZ-ynjABCD operon expression is activated by FNR (Federowicz, 2014).	b1752
ynjA	None	carboxymuconolactone decarboxylase family protein	Null	Carboxymuconolactone decarboxylase family protein; function unknown	YnjA is predicted to be a carboxymuconolactone decarboxylase-related protein (PF02627). The ydjXYZ-ynjABCD operon promoter region binds FNR and ydjXYZ-ynjABCD operon expression is activated by FNR (Federowicz, 2014).	b1753
ynjB	None	putative ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein	Null	Putative ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein	YnjB is the predicted periplasmic solute-binding protein (PF13416) of the predicted YnjCD ABC transporter in the ydjXYZ-ynjABCD operon; substrate unknown. The first 20 aa of YnjB are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. The ydjXYZ-ynjABCD operon promoter region binds FNR and ydjXYZ-ynjABCD operon expression is activated by FNR (Federowicz, 2014).	b1754
ynjC	None	putative ABC transporter permease	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative ABC transporter permease	The ydjXYZ-ynjABCD operon promoter region binds FNR and ydjXYZ-ynjABCD operon expression is activated by FNR (Federowicz, 2014).	b1755
ynjD	None	putative ABC transporter ATPase	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative ABC transporter ATPase	The ydjXYZ-ynjABCD operon promoter region binds FNR and ydjXYZ-ynjABCD operon expression is activated by FNR (Federowicz, 2014).	b1756
ynjE	None	molybdopterin synthase sulfurtransferase	Putative enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Sulfur metabolism	Molybdopterin synthase sulfurtransferase; IscS specificity factor for molybdenum cofactor biosynthesis; probable alternate MoaD transpersulfidase; weak thiosulfate:cyanide sulfurtransferase; rhodanese-like protein	YnjE, IscS, MoaD and MoeB form a complex in vivo (Dahl, 2011). In a purified in vitro system, YnjE increases molybdenum cofactor (MoCo) biosynthesis independent of the YnjE active site cysteine and without enhancing IscS activity, indicating that YnjE is probably a specificity factor recruiting IscS to MoCo synthesis when competing IscS substrates are present, facilitated by YnjE binding to MoeB which then tightens the IscS-MoaD interaction (Dahl, 2011). A ynjE mutant does not have reduced MoCo synthesis when grown in LB in iscS+ strains, but a ynjE mutation does reduce the residual MoCo present in in iscS mutant; the IscS specificty function of YnjE may not be needed during growth in LB; in the absence of IscS YnjE may be able to compensate by direct transpersulfidation of MoaD in vivo (Dahl, 2011). The sulfurtransferase IscS transfers sulfur to the active site Cys of YnjE in vitro forming a persulfide (Hänzelmann, 2009). An iscS mutant has reduced YnjE sulfuration indicating that IscS can form a YnjE persulfide in vivo (Dahl, 2011). YnjE has weak in vitro thiosulfate:cyanide sulfurtransferase activity and does not have detectable 3-mercaptopyruvate:cyanide sulfurtransferase activity (Hänzelmann, 2009). YnjE has three rhodanese domains. YnjE has an ambiguous signal prediction: the first 17 aa are predicted to be a type II signal peptide; the first 23 aa are predicted to be a type I signal peptide; YnjE is homologous to proteins with strong type II predictions; this may reflect signal type II to I evolution. YnjE has found to have a dual localization, being present in both the cytoplasm and the periplasm; no evidence for a membrane attachment was found (Dahl, 2011). The ambiguous signal peptide prediction for YnjE may indicate that the YnjE is poorly cleaved and secreted, leaving some protein in the cytoplasm and exporting some to the periplasm. The ynjE promoter region binds FNR and ynjE expression is activated by FNR (Federowicz, 2014).	b1757
ynjF	None	CDP-alcohol phosphatidyltransferase family inner membrane protein	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Inner membrane protein, phosphatidylglycerophosphate synthase homolog, function unknown	Null	b1758
nudG	orf135, ynjG	CTP pyrophosphohydrolase; also hydrolyzes 2-hydroxy-dATP, 8-hydroxy-dGTP, 5-hydroxy-CTP, dCTP and 5-methyl-dCTP	Null	CTP pyrophosphohydrolase; also hydrolyzes 2-hydroxy-dATP, 8-hydroxy-dGTP, 5-hydroxy-CTP, dCTP and 5-methyl-dCTP	Null	b1759
ynjH	None	DUF1496 family protein	Null	Putative secreted protein, function unknown; DUF1496 family	The first 18 aa of YnjH are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. Flagellar regulon. The ynjH gene can be transcribed in vitro with sigma28 (FliA) holoenzyme (Yu, 2006). YnjH homologs are present in Vibrio and enterobacterial species only.	b1760
ynjI	None	inner membrane protein	Null	Inner membrane protein, function unknown	Null	b1762
mntP	yebN	putative Mn(2+) efflux pump, mntR-regulated 	Putative transport; Not classified	Probable Mn(2+) efflux pump, mntR-regulated 	MntP is a probable Mn(2+) efflux pump induced by excess Mn(2+); an mntP mutant is senitive to Mn(2+) and accumulates excess intracellular manganese (Waters, 2011).	b1821
flhE	None	proton seal during flagellar secretion	Structural component; Surface structures	Proton seal during flagellar secretion; periplasmic; bound to flagellar basal body; required for full swarming motility	E. coli flhE mutant cells grow slowly, are impaired for swarming motility, show filament-dependent cell lysis, and have lower cytoplasmic pH, consistent with a plug or chaperone function for FlhE to prevent protons from leaking into the cell during flagellar secretion (Lee, 2012). The first 16 aa are predicted to be a type I signal peptide; FlhE signal peptide cleavage, periplasmic localization, and basal body association was determined in Salmonella (Lee, 2012).	b1878
yebO	None	putative inner membrane protein	Null	Predicted inner membrane protein, function unknown	YebO is predicted to have a single transmembrane helix from residues 10-32. YebO is the prototype for a family of proteins of unknown function (Pfam PF13974).	b1825
ldtE	ynhG	murein L,D-transpeptidase	Enzyme; Murein sacculus, peptidoglycan	Murein L,D-transpeptidase, periplasmic	LdtE(YnhG) catalyzes the rare meso-DAP(3)-->meso-DAP(3) murein cross-links (Magnet, 2008). The first 23 aa of LdtE are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. LdtA(ErfK) crosslinks to DsbG in vivo and has an active site cysteine that presumably is kept reduced by DsbG and DsbC to reverse sulfenic acid formation (Depuydt, 2009).	b1678
ynhF	None	stress response membrane 	Null	Stress response membrane protein, function unknown	YnhF has been identified as a chloroform-soluble peptide from the lipid fraction by partial peptide sequencing; YnhF retains its fMet initiator aa and is not deformylated (Guan, 2010). YnhF has a single predicted transmembrane helix and can be found in the mebrane fraction; YnhF is expressed during exponential and stationary growth (Hemm, 2008). YnhF expression is increased by partial oxygen depravation (Hemm, 2010). YnhF homologs can be found in some genomes of Citrobacter, Salmonella, Enterobacter, Cronobacter, Edwardsiella, Erwinia, Serratia, Pantoea, Pectobacterium, and Klebsiella species.	b4602
kdgR	yebP	KDG regulon transcriptional repressor	Regulator; Not classified	Transcriptional repressor for the KDG regulon	KdgR regulates 2-keto-3-deoxygluconate (KDG) transport and catabolism (Pouyssegur, 1974). KDG is derived from pectin, a common plant heteropolysaccharide, although E. coli K-12 does not secrete pectinases or uptake pectin oligosaccharides and has only the core KDG regulon as compared to plant pathogens like Erwinia chrysanthemi, whose extracellular pectate lyases and intacellular oligogalacturonate lyase breaks pectin down mainly into 5-keto-4-deoxyuronate (DKI) monomers and to a lesser extent polygalacturonase-generated galacturonate; in E. coli K-12 galacturonate uptake and degradation is mediated by the ExuT permease and the UxaABC catabolic enzymes producing KDG, respectively, and DKI is imported by the KdgR-regulated KDG importer KdgT and catabolized to KDG by the KdgR-regulated KduID enyzymes, also producing KDG; KDG is converted to pyruvate and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate by KdsK and Eda(KdsA) (Rodionov, 2004; Hugouvieux-Cotte-Pattat, 1996). A kdgR-yebQ clone conferred hypersensitivity to trimethoprim, but a yebQ-alone expression clone did not, leading the authors to conclude that overexpression of the transcriptional regulator KdgR was responsible for the Acr-S phenoptype. 2/360 KdgR peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed (Maillet, 2007).	b1827
yebQ	None	putative transporter	Putative transport; Not classified	Predicted transporter, function unknown; no overexpression resistances found	Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS).	b1828
msrC	yebR	free methionine-(R)-sulfoxide reductase	Null	Free methionine-(R)-sulfoxide reductase	Multiple alignment and RBS predictions support the annotation of native MsrC(YebR) as a 165 aa protein. A fully functional enzyme was translated efficiently initiating at this start site using a clone that also expressed a longer version with an N-terminal His-tag extension (Lin, 2007). Contains GAF domain. UPF0067 and COG1956 first functional member.	b1832
yebS	None	inner membrane PqiA domain protein	Null	Inner membrane PqiA domain protein; heat stress resistance protein	Although a wildtype strain was unaffected, a yebS deletion mutant exhibited 30% survival after 100 minutes at 56C (Kri Ko, 2014). YebS is comprised of two tandem PqiA (PF04403) domains. The pqiAB and yebST genes are paralogous.	b1833
yebT	None	MCE domain protein	Null	MCE domain protein, function unknown	YebT is comprised of seven tandem MCE domains (PF02470); MCE domains are found in and named after the mce (mammalian cell entry) host colonization proteins of M. tuberculosis. The pqiAB and yebST genes are paralogous. YebT has been reported to be upregulated by beryllium, although it was misidentified as its paralog PqiB; yebT was identified using the now obsolete NCBI protein gi identifier 1736475 cited in table 1 (Taylor-McCabe, 2006).	b1834
rsmF	yebU	16S rRNA m(5)C1407 methyltransferase, SAM-dependent	Enzyme; rRNA modification	16S rRNA m(5)C1407 methyltransferase, SAM-dependent	Null	b1835
yebV	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Function unknown	Repressed during biofilm formation.	b1836
yebW	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Function unknown	Null	b1837
pphA	prpA, yebX	serine/threonine-specific protein phosphatase 1	Regulator; Not classified	Ser/Thr protein phosphatase 1; signals periplasmic protein misfolding; heat shock regulon	Null	b1838
yebY	None	DUF2511 family protein	Null	DUF2511 family protein	Upregulated by GSNO in defined medium (aerobic). YebY and YnfD may be distantly related. First 20 aa are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. Cpx regulon.	b1839
yebZ	None	inner membrane protein	Putative transport; Drug/analog sensitivity	Inner membrane protein, function unknown	Null	b1840
yobA	None	CopC family protein	Null	CopC family protein, function unknown	The first 26 aa of YobA are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. YobA is in teh CobC family (PF04234) and CopC is a copper-binding protein that confers copper resistance. YobA may be a CopC-like periplasmic copper-binding protein that works with CopA.	b1841
yobB	None	C-N hydrolase family protein	Putative enzyme; Not classified	C-N hydrolase family protein, function unknown	YobB is a member of the C-N hydrolase family (Pfam PF00795).	b1843
exoX	yobC	exodeoxyribonuclease 10; DNA exonuclease X	Null	Exodeoxyribonuclease 10, Exonuclease X; 3'-5' DNase; confers UV sensitivity in recJ, xseAB, sbcB background	Null	b1844
yecN	None	MAPEG family inner membrane protein	Null	Inner membrane protein, MAPEG family, function unknown	Null	b1869
cmoA	yecO	carboxy-SAM synthase	Enzyme; tRNA modification	Carboxy-SAM synthase	The carboxy-SAM synthase CmoA utilizes prephenate as a carboxyl donor to synthesize carboxy-SAM, converting prephenate to phenylpyruvate and carbon dioxide; the departing prephenate hydroxyl group abstracts a proton from the S-methyl group of SAM generating water and a stabilized carbanion SAM ylide intermediate, which is then carboxylated by the carbon dioxide; prephenate is derived from chorismate; the carboxy-SAM co-factor is utilized by the CmoB tRNA (cmo5U34)-carboxymethyltransferase as the carboxymethyl donor (Kim, 2013). tRNAs from aroC and aroD mutants lack cmo5U and its methyl ester mcmo5U, implicating chorismate or a derivative in their synthesis (Björk, 1979; Björk, 1980; Hagervall, 1990). Two alternatives were proposed for the synthesis of cmo5U from ho5U in E. coli including the direct conversion by a carboxymethyltransferase (referred to as an acetylase) and a two-step reaction with mo5U as an intermediate; mo5U34 is present in the U wobble base of tRNAs from B. subtilis (Murao, 1978). CmoA, a member of the methyltrasferase superfamily, was previously thought to be involved in the chorismate-dependent conversion of mo5U34 to cmo5U34 in tRNA as both ho5U and mo5U accumulated in a cmoA mutant and in an aroD mutant, although a mechanism was not apparent; CmoB was previously thought to be responsible for the conversion of ho5U to mo5U since only ho5U accumulated in a cmoB mutants (Nasvall, 2004). Now it seems, since mo5U is not an intermediate in (m)cmo5U synthesis, that CmoB might utilize SAM inefficiently in the absence of CmoA-generated carboxy-SAM to form mo5U. Carboxy-SAM (Cx-SAM), also called S-adenosyl-S-carboxymethyl-l-homocysteine (SCM-SAH), was identified in crystal structures of E. coli and H. influenzae CmoA (Kim, 2013; Byrne, 2013). otherPDB (H. influenzae): 1IM8 (Lim, 2001). 4/128 CmoA(YecO) peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is not removed (Maillet, 2007). CmoA peptide masses from MS/MS analysis indicate this is the correct start site and that the initial Met is removed (Guo, 2014).	b1870
cmoB	yecP	tRNA (cmo5U34)-carboxymethyltransferase, carboxy-SAM-dependent	Enzyme; tRNA modification	tRNA (cmo5U34)-carboxymethyltransferase, carboxy-SAM-dependent	The carboxymethyltransferase CmoB utilizes the novel SAM derivative carboxy-SAM to convert 5-hydroxyuridine (ho5U34) to 5-oxyacetyl uridine (cmo5U34) in tRNA; the enzymes responsible for making ho5U and mcmoU5 are unknown (Kim, 2013). Two alternatives were proposed for the synthesis of cmo5U from ho5U in E. coli including the direct conversion by an acetylase (actually a carboxymethyltransferase) and a two-step reaction with mo5U as an intermediate; mo5U34 is present in the U wobble base of tRNAs from B. subtilis (Murao, 1978). In S. typhimurium, CmoA, a member of the methyltransferase superfamily, was previously thought to be involved in the chorismate-dependent conversion of mo5U34 to cmo5U34 in tRNA as both ho5U and mo5U accumulated in a cmoA mutant and in an aroD mutant, although a mechanism was not apparent; CmoB was previously thought to be responsible for the conversion of ho5U to mo5U since only ho5U accumulated in a cmoB mutants (Nasvall, 2004). Now it seems from work done in E. coli, that since mo5U is not an intermediate in (m)cmo5U synthesis, CmoB might utilize SAM inefficiently in the absence of CmoA-generated carboxy-SAM to form mo5U from ho5U. It is also possible that mcmo5U is made from cmo5U by CmoB utilizing SAM instead of carboxy-SAM.	b1871
flhB	flaG, yecQ	flagellin export apparatus, substrate specificity protein	Structural component; Not classified	Flagellin export apparatus, substrate specificity protein; determines the order of subunit export	Autocleavage of C-terminal domain regulates early-late flagellar protein export switch in Salmonella and E. coli; the cleaved domain (270-383 aa)remains tightly bound (Minamino, 2000; Ferris, 2005). Integral membrane protein. Flagellar regulon.	b1880
yecR	None	lipoprotein, function unknown	Null	Required for phage lambda growth and antibiotic resistance; verified lipoprotein	Mutants in yecR are defective for phage lambda growth (Maynard, 2010). A yecR mutant has increased sensitivity to several antibiotics (Girgis, 2009). The first 15 aa of YecR are a type II signal peptide. 	b1904
yecS	None	ABC family putative inner membrane permease	Putative transport; Not classified	Predicted amino acid ABC permease, inner membrane protein; function unknown	FliY, YecC and YecS may constitute an ABC transport system for the import of L-cystine.	b1918
dcyD	yedO	D-cysteine desulfhydrase, PLP-dependent	Putative enzyme; Not classified	D-cysteine desulfhydrase; needed for protection from and utilization of D-cysteine	DcyD is induced under conditions of sulfate limitation. DcyD is similar to aminocyclopropane-carboxylate deaminases, but DcyD does not have this activity and does not use aminocyclopropane-carboxylate as substrate.	b1919
yedP	None	putative mannosyl-3-phosphoglycerate phosphatase	Null	Predicted mannosyl-3-phosphoglycerate phosphatase; function unknown; HAD19	HAD superfamily. No activity was demonstrated in vitro, screening 80 substrates, but mannosyl-3-phosphoglycerate was not tested (Kuznetsova, 2006).	b1955
yedQ	None	putative membrane-anchored diguanylate cyclase	Null	Predicted membrane-anchored diguanylate cyclase	A null yedQ mutation slightly suppresses the motility defect of a yhjH null mutant at 28C and 37C; a yedQ mutation is needed in addition to yegE (28C) or yegE yeaJ (37C) to restore full motility to the yhjH mutant (Pesavento, 2008). YedQ has an N-terminal predicted periplasmic domain flanked by two TM segments and has a C-terminal cytoplasmic diguanylate cyclase GGDEF domain. RpoS regulon (Weber, 2006; Pesavento, 2008).	b1956
yedR	None	inner membrane protein	Null	Inner membrane protein, function unknown	Null	b1963
yedS'	yedT	pseudogene, outer membrane protein homology	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction, outer membrane protein homolog	Salmonella OmpS1 homolog. The first 21 aa of yedS are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. An in-frame stop was translated as an X at position 162; a frameshift reconstruction was made at codon 222.	b4496
yedV	None	putative sensory kinase in two-component regulatory system with YedW	Putative regulator; Not classified	Predicted histidine protein kinase sensor, function unknown	Part of putative two-component regulator system with response regulator YedW	b1968
yedW	None	response regulator family protein	Putative regulator; Not classified	Putative response regulator, function unknown	Part of putative two-component regulator system with response regulator YedV.	b1969
hiuH	yedX	hydroxyisourate hydrolase	Enzyme; Purine catabolism	Hydroxyisourate hydrolase; HIU hydrolase, HIUHase; periplasmic transthyretin-like protein (TLP); EcTRP; tetrameric, metal-binding; unrelated to soybean HIUHase	Purified E. coli HiuH(YedX) hydrolyzes 5-hydroxyisourate producing both allantoin and the intermediate 2-oxo-4-hydroxy-4-carboxy-5-ureidoimidazoline (OHCU) which will spontaneously decay into a racemic mixture of R- and S-allantoin but AllB allantoinase metabolizes S-allantoin only, so HiuH may also have OHCU decarboxylase activity (Lee, 2005; Hennebry, 2006). The E. coli K-12 genome does not encode an OHCU decarboxylase (COG3195) homolog. E. coli can convert xanthine to allantoin, although less efficiently than K. pneumoniae; HiuH(YedX) might participate in purine catabolism by helping to degrade the uric acid produced by xanthine dehydrogenase (Xi, 2000). It has been suggested that the lack of uricase enzyme activity might be partially compensated for by a spontaneous reaction of uric acid acting as an antioxidant in the periplasm resulting in a non-enzymatic production of 5-hydroxyisourate and that HiuH might protect from free radicals (Hennebry, 2006). The HIUHase family has a C -terminal YRGS conserved motif. Purified E. coli HiuH(YedX) can be induced to form fibrils with stirring or heat (Santos, 2008; Lundberg, 2009). Cleavage of the 23 aa signal peptide and the periplasmic localization of HiuH(YedX) have been experimentally verified (Mitchell, R., Hus, N. and Rudd, K.E., unpublished results, 1999). PDB: 2IGL citation: Purification and structure determination of YedX, a transthyretin-related protein from Escherichia coli, Zuo, Y., Ballanco, J., Shah, J., Wang, Y., Rivera, S., Ragan, T.J., Hernandez, G., Nelersa, C.M., Mitchell, R., Rudd, K.E., and Malhotra, A., unpublished, 2006).	b1970
yedY	None	membrane-anchored, periplasmic TMAO, DMSO reductase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Membrane-anchored, periplasmic TMAO, DMSO reductase; activity shown in vitro; Mo-MPT form of the molybdenum cofactor; tungsten cofactor	YedZY has other in vitro substrates, physiological role unknown; mutant had no growth defect. Verified Tat substrate: YedY has a Tat/Sec (Class II) 44 aa signal peptide (Tullman-Ercek, 2007). YedY is attached to membrane by the YedZ subunit. DmsD and TorD can act as REMPs for YedY.	b1971
yedZ	None	inner membrane heme subunit for periplasmic YedYZ reductase	Null	Inner membrane heme subunit for periplasmic YedYZ reductase	YedY is anchored to the membrane by the YedZ subunit. Topology mapped using protein fusions. EPR spectroscopy shows that YedZ has a HALS-type low-spin heme.	b1972
zinT	yodA	zinc and cadmium binding protein, periplasmic 	Null	Periplasmic zinc and cadmium binding protein; induced by zinc, cadmium or peroxide; Zur, SoxS and Fur regulated	A zinT mutant grows slightly slower than wt, and has three-fold lower Zn(2+) levels, in Zn(2+)-depleted media; ZinT binds Zn(2+) preferentially over Cd(2+) and zinT expression is induced by Zn(2+) depletion (Graham, 2009). An earlier report that zinT mutants require added zinc for growth is in conflict with more recent results (Kershaw, 2007; Graham, 2009). ZinT is proposed to be either a periplasmic zinc chaperone or a zinc-binding protein involved in zinc import (Kershaw, 2007; Graham, 2009). Overexpression causes abnormal biofilm architecture. ZinT(YodA) is lipocalin-like.	b1973
yodB	None	cytochrome b561 homolog	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Cytochrome b561 homolog, function unknown	Null	b1974
yegH	None	inner membrane protein	Putative transport; Not classified	Inner membrane protein, function unknown	Null	b2063
yegI	None	protein kinase-related putative non-specific DNA-binding protein	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Protein kinase-related predicted non-specific DNA-binding protein	The first 300 residues of protein of unknown function YegI (InterPro IPR016960; COG4248) constitute a Ser/Thr protein kinase-like N-terminal domain (NCBI CDD cd00180; InterPro IPR011009; COG0515) and a C-terminal helix-hairpin-helix (HhH) non-specific DNA-binding domain (residues 515-559) similar to that in found in DinB (Pfam PF14520; NCBI CDD cd03586) (Doherty, 1996). The YegK predicted Ser/Thr phosphatase and the YegI predicted Ser/Thr protein kinase/helix-hairpin-helix protein frequently occur together in genomes and may constitute a novel regulatory system (K.E.R.).	b2070
yegJ	None	DUF2314 family protein	Null	DUF2314 family protein	Null	b2071
yegK	None	ser/thr phosphatase-related protein	Null	Ser/Thr phosphatase-related protein	YegK is a member of the PF13672 family of proteins related to the PP2C Ser-Thr phosphatase. The YegK predicted Ser/Thr phosphatase and the YegI predicted Ser/Thr protein kinase/helix-hairpin-helix protein frequently occur together in genomes and may constitute a novel regulatory system (K.E.R.).	b2072
yegL	None	VMA domain protein	Null	VWA domain protein	YegL is a member of the PF00092 family of VWA domain proteins related to von Willebrand factor type A.	b2073
mdtA	yegM	multidrug efflux system, subunit A	Putative membrane; Not classified	MdtABC-TolC efflux pump, multidrug resistance; membrane fusion protein, signal anchor	Plasmid-mediated mdtABC overexpression increases resistance to deoxycholate 32-fold and novobiocin 16-fold in an acrAB mutant background (Nishino, 2001). Chromosomal mdtABC-iceT(mdtD) expression induced by plasmid-mediated BaeR overproduction increases resistance to deoxycholate and novobiocin in an acrAB mutant; mutations in mdtB and mdtC but not iceT(mdtD) abolish this BaeR-induced resistance phenotype (Baranova, 2002). In an acrAB mutant background, plasmid-mediated mdtABC or baeR overexpression increases resistance to deoxycholate and novobiocin, as well as to SDS, cholate and taurocholate (Nagakubo, 2002). In a wildtype genetic background an mdtABC(yegMNO) deletion strain exhibited no increase in the sensitivities to 35 tested compounds including deoxycholate and novobiocin (Sulavik, 2001). BaeSR, EvgAS regulons.	b2074
mdtB	yegN	multidrug efflux system, subunit B	Null	MdtABC-TolC efflux pump, multidrug resistance; heterodimeric RND-type transporter	Plasmid-mediated mdtABC overexpression increases resistance to deoxycholate 32-fold and novobiocin 16-fold in an acrAB mutant background (Nishino, 2001). Chromosomal mdtABC-iceT(mdtD) expression induced by plasmid-mediated BaeR overproduction increases resistance to deoxycholate and novobiocin in an acrAB mutant; mutations in mdtB and mdtC but not iceT(mdtD) abolish this BaeR-induced resistance phenotype (Baranova, 2002). In an acrAB mutant background, plasmid-mediated mdtABC or baeR overexpression increases resistance to deoxycholate and novobiocin, as well as to SDS, cholate and taurocholate; an insertion in mdtB abolished the baeR-induced drug resistance (Nagakubo, 2002). In a wildtype genetic background an mdtABC(yegMNO) deletion strain exhibited no increase in the sensitivities to 35 tested compounds incuding deoxycholate and novobiocin (Sulavik, 2001). BaeSR, EvgAS regulons.	b2075
mdtC	yegO	multidrug efflux system, subunit C	Null	MdtABC-TolC efflux pump, multidrug resistance; heterodimeric RND-type transporter	Plasmid-mediated mdtABC overexpression increases resistance to deoxycholate 32-fold and novobiocin 16-fold in an acrAB mutant background (Nishino, 2001). Chromosomal mdtABC-iceT(mdtD) expression induced by plasmid-mediated BaeR overproduction increases resistance to deoxycholate and novobiocin in an acrAB mutant; mutations in mdtB and mdtC but not iceT(mdtD) abolish this BaeR-induced resistance phenotype (Baranova, 2002). In an acrAB mutant background, plasmid-mediated mdtABC or baeR overexpression increases resistance to deoxycholate and novobiocin, as well as to SDS, cholate and taurocholate (Nagakubo, 2002). In a wildtype genetic background an mdtABC(yegMNO) deletion strain exhibited no increase in the sensitivities to 35 tested compounds incuding deoxycholate and novobiocin (Sulavik, 2001). mdtC is upregulated by GSNO in defined medium (aerobic). BaeSR, EvgAS regulons.	b2076
yegP	None	UPF0339 family protein	Null	UPF0339 family protein	Null	b2080
yegQ	None	putative peptidase	Null	U32 peptidase family protein	ydcP, yegQ, yhbU, and yhbV are paralogs. A CTG start codon nine codons upstream of the current start has been proposed as an alternate start site, but lack of conservation suggests the current start is correct (Maillet, 2007).	b2081
yegR	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Probable lipoprotein	EvgAS regulon. Overexpression causes abnormal biofilm architecture. E. coli-only protein. The first 17 aa of YegR are predicted to be a type II signal peptide.	b2085
fbaB	dhnA	fructose-bisphosphate aldolase class I	Null	Fructose 1,6-bisphosphate aldolase, class I	Null	b2097
yegT	None	nucleoside transporter, low affinity	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Nucleosides, purines, pyrimidines	Nucleoside transporter, low affinity	The function of YegT as a low affinity purine nucleoside transporter is noted as unpublished results of B. Mygind and G. Dandanell of the online review Module 3.6.2 (Nucleotides, Nucleosides, and Nucleobases by K.F. Jensen et al., 2008) at www.ecosal.org. NupG, XapB and YegT are paralogs. Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS). yegTUV operon.	b2098
yegU	None	ADP-ribosylglycohydrolase family protein	Null	ADP-ribosylglycohydrolase family protein	Pfam ADP_ribosyl_GH PF03747 family. yegTUV operon.	b2099
yegV	None	putative kinase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Predicted sugar/nucleoside kinase	Pfam PfkB-like PF00294 family.	b2100
yegW	None	putative DNA-binding transcriptional regulator	Putative regulator; Not classified	Putatitve transcriptional regulator	4/58 YegW peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is not removed (Maillet, 2007).	b2101
yegX	None	putative family 25 glycosyl hydrolase	Null	Predicted family 25 glycosyl hydrolase	Null	b2102
thiD	thiA, thiJ, thiN	hydroxy-methylpyrimidine kinase and hydroxy-phosphomethylpyrimidine kinase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Thiamine	Phosphomethylpyrimidine kinase, HMP-P kinase; hydroxymethylpyrimidine kinase, HMP kinase; bifunctional enzyme	Null	b2103
thiM	None	hydoxyethylthiazole kinase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Thiamine	Hydroxyethylthiazole kinase	thiMD operon expression is controlled by a thiamine pyrophosphate (TPP) responsive riboswitch in the 5' UTR. The thiM riboswitch is the target for the antibiotic pyrithiamine. The PDB links are to the structures of various thiM riboswitch/small molecule complexes: 2GDI, TPP; 2HOJ, TPP/Mn2+; 2HOK, TPP/Ca2+; 2HOL, TPP/Ba2+; 2HOM,TMP; 2HOO, BTP; 2HOP, PT (Serganov, 2006; Edwards, 2006).	b2104
rcnR	yohL	transcriptional repressor of rcnA	Null	Transcriptional repressor of rcnA; nickel- and cobalt-responsive	The rcnR-rcnA promoter interaction is inhibited by nickel and cobalt; an rcnR mutant constitutively expresses rcnA (Iwig, 2006). rcnR and frmR are paralogs.	b2105
rcnA	yohM	membrane protein conferring nickel and cobalt resistance	Null	Nickel and cobalt efflux system; confers increased nickel and cobalt resistance; inner membrane protein	Induced by nickel or cobalt. Fur regulon (Koch, 2006). Residues 121-146 constitute a histidine-rich region probably involved in metal binding.	b2106
rcnB	yohN	periplasmic modulator of Ni and Co efflux	Null	Periplasmic modulator of Ni and Co efflux	rcnA mutants have lowered intracellular concentrations and enhanced resistance to Ni and Co due to incresed RcnA-mediated efflux (Blériot, 2011). DUF3315 family.	b2107
yeiS	None	DUF2542 family protein	Null	DUF2542 family protein	Null	b2145
preT	dpdA, preB, yeiT	dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase, NADH-dependent, subunit N	Enzyme; pyrimidine metabolism	Dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase, NADH-dependent, subunit N; pyrimidine metabolism; upregulated in biofilms	EcDPD (PreAT) physiologically converts uracil into 5,6-dihydrouracil (DHU) (Mihara, 2008; Hidese, 2011). Biofilm microarray result was validated with RT-PCR. HT_Cmplx37_Cyt: (PreA)YeiA+(PreT)YeiT.	b2146
lpxT	yeiU	lipid A 1-diphosphate synthase; undecaprenyl pyrophosphate:lipid A 1-phosphate phosphotransferase	Null	Lipid A 1-diphosphate synthase; undecaprenyl pyrophosphate:lipid A 1-phosphate phosphotransferase	One third of the lipid A pool is lipid A 1-diphosphate formed by a periplasmic domain of LpxT (Touze, 2008). Overexpression of the lpxT(yeiU)-encoded undecaprenyl pyrophosphate:lipid A 1-phosphate phosphotransferase activity rescues the lethal UppP deficiency of a bacA, bcrC, pgpB triple mutant (El Ghachi, 2005). ybjG, pgpB, and lpxT are paralogs.	b2174
mepS	spr, yeiV	murein DD-endopeptidase, space-maker hydrolase, mutational suppressor of prc thermosensitivity, outer membrane lipoprotein, weak murein LD-carboxypeptidase	Enzyme; Murein sacculus, peptidoglycan	Murein DD-endopeptidase, space-maker hydrolase, lipoprotein; weak murein LD-carboxypeptidase	The outer membrane lipoprotein MepS(Spr) is one of three D-alanine-meso-DAP specific murein DD-endopeptidases, including MepM(YebA) and MepH(YdhO), which are the long predicted space-maker hydrolases needed to cleave peptide cross-bridges in murein so that the murein sacculus can be elongated by murein synthases; although MepS(Spr) was reported to act on intact sacculi in a zymogram assay, it is unable to hydrolyze intact murein sacculi in the standard liquid assay that supports MepS(Spr)-mediated conversion of soluble cross-linked muropeptide dimers into monomers; MepS(Spr) has weak LD-carboxypeptidase activity; an mepS(spr)-mepH(ydhO)-mepM(yebA) triple mutation is lethal and an mepS(spr)-mepM(yebA) double mutant fails to grow on rich media but grows on minimal media (Singh, 2012). mepS(spr) mutations were first identified because prc deletions are TS at low salt and are suppressible by mepS(spr) mutations; mepS(spr) prc+ strains are also TS at low salt, which are suppressible by multicopy expression of PBP7 (PbpG). The first 26 aa of MepS(Spr) are a type II signal peptide. MepS(Spr), NlpC, YafL and MepH(YdhO) are paralogous members of the NlpC/P60 peptidase superfamily (Pfam entry: PF00877). The spr, yebA, and ydhO genes have been renamed as mepS, mepM, and mepH, respectively (M. Reddy, personal communication).	b2175
rtn	None	resistance protein for phages lambda and N4, putative membrane-anchored cyclic-di-GMP phosphodiesterase	Null	Predicted membrane-anchored cyclic-di-GMP phosphodiesterase; overexpression confers resistance to phages lambda and N4	Rtn was originally identified as a P. vulgaris gene cloned in E. coli that conferred resistance to phages lambda and N4, but it is an E. coli gene, not a P. vulgaris gene. Rtn may be membrane-associated. Rtn has an N-terminal predicted periplasmic CSS domain (PF12792) flanked by two TM segments and has a C-terminal cytoplasmic EAL PDE domain with the EVL variant and is predicted to be an active PDE. Probable false positive lipoprotein prediction, 2 CM TMs predicted, Cys not conserved.	b2176
yfaP	None	DUF2135 family protein, putative host defense protein	Null	DUF2135 family protein, function unknown; predicted host defense protein	yfaP is in the yfaATSQP operon encoding the variant bacterial alpha2-macroglobulin family protein YfaS, leading to a prediction that YfaT is also involved in host defenses, possibly in the extracellular environment (Budd, 2004). The first 19 aa of YfaP are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. YfaP belongs to the COG4676 family and has a ~45 aa DUF2135 domain near the C-terminus.	b2225
yfaQ	None	tandem DUF2300 domain protein, putative host defense protein	Null	Tandem DUF2300 domain protein, function unknown; predicted host defense protein	yfaQ is in the yfaATSQP operon encoding the variant bacterial alpha2-macroglobulin family protein YfaS, leading to a prediction that YfaT is also involved in host defenses, possibly in the extracellular environment (Budd, 2004). The first 19 aa of YfaQ are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. YfaQ is tandem COG5445 protein with two DUF2300 domain as well as at least one domain related to SpoIID, an amidase that is a cell wall hydrolase.	b2226
yfaS'	yfaR	pseudogene, bacterial alpha2-macroglobulin YfaS variant family	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction, bacterial alpha2-macroglobulin; YfaS variant family	Intact YfaS is a member of a variant family of bacterial alpha2-macroglobulins likely to be involved in protecting the bacteria from host defenses including proteases; the YfaS family appears to be horizontally acquired from mammalian host genomes and lacks the thioester motif CxEQ active in experimentally characterized E. coli K-12 MG1655 YfhM (ECAM) and found in other YfhM family members; the alpha-macroglobulin chicken ovostatin also lacks the thioester motif but can inhibit proteases without it; yfaS is in the yfaATSQP operon of predicted secreted proteins predicted to all be involved in defense against the host, possibly in the extracellular environment (Budd, 2004). YfaS' has an in-frame stop codon 1368 that is translated as an X in the reconstructed pseudogene protein sequence. The full length allele in many other E. coli strains (e.g. O157:H7 EDL933 Z3481 UniProtKB: Q8XE35) have a Trp codon in this position. E. coli may be able translate this stop codon with Trp at a very low level, producing some full length readthrough protein. The corresponding UniProtKB: P76464 sequence translates stop codon 1368 as a Trp. The first 38 aa of YfaS are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b4500
yfaT	None	DUF1175 family protein, putative host defense protein	Null	DUF1175 family protein, function unknown; predicted host defense protein	yfaT is in the yfaATSQP operon encoding the variant bacterial alpha2-macroglobulin family protein YfaS, leading to a prediction that YfaT is also involved in host defenses, possibly in the extracellular environment (Budd, 2004). The first 19 aa of YfaT are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b2229
rhmA	yfaU	2-keto-3-deoxy-L-rhamnonate aldolase	Enzyme; Sugar metabolism	2-keto-3-deoxy-L-rhamnonate aldolase	2-keto-3-deoxy-L-rhamnonate aldolase also performs a retroaldol reaction on the other products of RhmD 2-keto-3-deoxy-l-mannonate and 2-keto-3-deoxy-l-lyxonate indicating a coupled pathway of assimilation of the RhmD substrates which are likely to be imported using the neighboring transporter homolog RhmT; all three genes appear to be in a rhmRDTA operon with the RhmR predicted transcriptional regulator (Rea, 2008). yfaXWVU is renamed as rhmRDTA (personal communication, J. Gerlt and D. Roper, 2010).	b2245
rhmT	yfaV	putative L-rhamnonate transporter	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative L-rhamnonate transporter	Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS). RhmT may transport L-rhamnonate and other substrate for RhmD (Rea, 2008). yfaXWVU is renamed as rhmRDTA (personal communication, J. Gerlt and D. Roper, 2010).	b2246
rhmD	yfaW	L-rhamnonate dehydratase	Enzyme; Sugar metabolism	L-rhamnonate dehydratase; RhamD	 L-rhamnonate dehydratase also dehydrates L-lyxonate, L-mannonate and D-gulonate (Rakus, 2008). yfaXWVU is renamed as rhmRDTA (personal communication, J. Gerlt and D. Roper, 2010).	b2247
rhmR	yfaX	putative DNA-binding transcriptional regulator for the rhm operon	Putative regulator; Not classified	Putative rhm operon regulator	yfaXWVU is renamed as rhmRDTA (personal communication, J. Gerlt and D. Roper, 2010).	b2248
yfaY	cinA(B.s.)	inactive PncC family protein	Null	Inactive PncC domain protein, function unknown; predicted molybdopterin-binding protein	YdeJ and YfaY are inactive PncC homologs; PncC(YgaD) is the only one of three PncC(CinA) domain (PF02464) proteins that has NMN deamidase activity (Galeazzi, 2011). YfaY has an N-terminal predicted molybdopterin-binding domain (PF00994) and a C-terminal inactive PncC(CinA) domain (PF02464). 	b2249
yfaZ	None	outer membrane protein, putative porin	Null	Outer membrane protein, possible porin, function unknown	The predicted 21 aa signal peptide of YfaZ is consistent with an observed secB-dependent precursor cleavage that is blocked by azide (Marani, 2006).	b2250
arnB	pgbP1(S.t.), pmrH(S.t.), yfbE	uridine 5'-(beta-1-threo-pentapyranosyl-4-ulose diphosphate) aminotransferase, PLP-dependent	Putative enzyme; Not classified	UDP-4-amino-4-deoxy-L-arabinose synthase; UDP-4"-ketopentose aminotransferase; L-glutamate is the amine donor	ArnB is involved in a lipid A modification required for polymyxin B and cationic antimicrobial peptide resistance. The arnBCADTEF operon promoter region binds FNR and arnBCADTEF expression is repressed by FNR (Federowicz, 2014). basRS regulon. otherPDB (S. typhimurium): 1MDO, 1MDX, 1MDZ.	b2253
arnC	ORF2, pmrF(S.t.), yfbF	undecaprenyl phosphate-L-Ara4FN transferase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Undecaprenyl phosphate-aminoarabinose synthase	ArnC is involved in the modification of lipid A phosphates with aminoarabinose that is required for polymyxin B and cationic antimicrobial peptide resistance. UDP-beta-4-deoxy-4-formamido-L-arabinose is the sugar donor. The arnBCADTEF operon promoter region binds FNR and arnBCADTEF expression is repressed by FNR (Federowicz, 2014). basRS regulon.	b2254
arnA	pbgP3(S.t.), pmrI(S.t.), SAF, yfbG	fused UDP-L-Ara4N formyltransferase/UDP-GlcA C-4'-decarboxylase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	UDP-glucuronate dehydrogenase and UDP-ara4N formyltransferase	ArnA is a bifunctional enzyme involved in the modification of lipid A phosphates with aminoarabinose that is required for polymyxin B and cationic antimicrobial peptide resistance. ArnA catalyzes two steps in lipid A phosphate group modification by aminoarabinose: the C-terminal 345-residues encode the NAD+-dependent dehydrogenase domain that catalyzes the first step in UDP-4-amino-4-deoxy-L-arabinose synthesis and involves successive C4 oxidation and C6 decarboxylation steps; the N-terminal 304-residue domain encodes N-10 formyltetrahydrofolate-dependent UDP-aminoarabinose N-formyltransferase (UDP-formamidoarabinose synthase) that makes the substrate for ArnC: UDP-ara4FN = uridine 5'-diphospho-beta-(4-deoxy-4-formamido-L-arabinose). ArnA is identical to ssrA-associated factor SAF. basRS regulon. The arnBCADTEF operon promoter region binds FNR and arnBCADTEF expression is repressed by FNR (Federowicz, 2014).	b2255
arnD	pbgP4(S.t.), pmrJ(S.t.), yfbH	undecaprenyl phosphate-alpha-L-ara4FN deformylase	Null	Undecaprenyl phosphate-aminoarabinose deformylase	An arnD mutant strain accumulates formylated C55-P-LAra4N and blocks C55-P-LAra4N production, supporting the deformylase functional assignment (S.D. Breazeale, A.A. Ribeiro, A.L. McClerren, and C.R.H. Raetz, in preparation, personal communication November, 2007). ArnD is involved in the modification of lipid A phosphates with aminoarabinose that is required for polymyxin B and cationic antimicrobial peptide resistance. The arnBCADTEF operon promoter region binds FNR and arnBCADTEF expression is repressed by FNR (Federowicz, 2014). Chitin deacetylase family (COG0726).	b2256
arnT	pbgE1(S.t.), pmrK(S.t.), pqaB(S.t.), yfbI	4-amino-4-deoxy-L-arabinose transferase	Null	4-amino-4-deoxy-L-arabinose(Ara4N):Lipid A transferase; modifies lipid A phosphates with aminoarabinose and confers resistance to polymyxin B and cationic antimicrobial peptides; glycolipid donor is undecaprenyl phosphate-alpha-L-Ara4N; inner membrane pro	The arnBCADTEF operon promoter region binds FNR and arnBCADTEF expression is repressed by FNR (Federowicz, 2014). basRS regulon. arnT is required for survival in PMA-U937 human monocyte macrophage cells in culture. ArnT has a probable false positive lipoprotein prediction, 12 CM TMs predicted, Cys not conserved.	b2257
arnF	pbgE3(S.t.), pmrM(S.t.), yfbJ	undecaprenyl phosphate-alpha-L-ara4N exporter; flippase ArnEF subunit	Transport; Transport of small molecules: lipids	Undecaprenyl phosphate-alpha-L-ara4N exporter; flippase ArnEF subunit	Export via ArnEF is required for the modification of lipid A phosphates with aminoarabinose that is needed for polymyxin B and cationic antimicrobial peptide resistance (Yan, 2007). ArnEF is also known as the probable 4-amino-4-deoxy-L-arabinose(Ara4N)-phosphoundecaprenol flippase. ArnF(YfbJ) has been reported to be required for swarming phenotype (Inoue, 2007). The arnBCADTEF operon promoter region binds FNR and arnBCADTEF expression is repressed by FNR (Federowicz, 2014).	b2258
yfbK	None	Von Willebrand factor domain putative lipoprotein	Null	Von Willebrand factor domain predicted lipoprotein, function unknown	The first 18 aa of YfbK are predicted to be a type II signal peptide and the predicted N-terminal Cys is conserved. YfbK is a member of the PF00092 family of VWA domain proteins related to von Willebrand factor type A with a DUF3520 C-terminal domain.	b2270
yfbL	None	putative M28A family peptidase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Putative M28A family peptidase, function unknown	Null	b2271
yfbM	None	DUF1877 family protein	Null	DUF1877 family protein, function unknown	The yfbM promoter region binds ArcA (Federowicz, 2014).	b2272
yfbN	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Uncharacterized protein, function unknown	YfbN homologs are mainly present in a subset of E. coli and Pseudomonas strains.	b2273
yfbO	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Uncharacterized protein, function unknown	Although widespread in E. coli strains, YfbO homologs are present in only a few other genomes.	b2274
yfbP	None	TPR-like repeats-containing protein	Null	TPR-like repeats-containing protein, function unknown	Null	b2275
alaA	yfbQ	glutamate-pyruvate aminotransferase; glutamic-pyruvic transaminase (GPT); alanine transaminase	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Alanine	Glutamate-pyruvate aminotransferase; glutamic-pyruvic transaminase (GPT); alanine transaminase	alaA is a hyperlethality gene.	b2290
yfbR	None	5'-nucleotidase	Phenotype; Not classified	5'-nucleotidase; only canonical deoxyribonucleosides used as substrates	Divalent metal required for catalytic activity. YfbR inhibited by both ribo- and deoxyribonucleoside di- and triphosphates, along with sensitivity to ATP, dATP and ADP.	b2291
yfbS	None	putative transporter	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative transporter, function unknown	IT (Ion Transporter) superfamily (Prakash, 2003). ST(3) structural class based on hydropathy profile (Lolkema, 2003).	b2292
yfbT	None	sugar phosphatas	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Sugar phosphatase; physiological role unknown; in vitro substrates include: fructose-1-P, fructose-6-P, glucose 6-P, ribose-5-P; selectively hydrolyzes beta-D-glucose-1-P; HAD2	YfbT is an expressed protein. HAD superfamily. In vitro activities demonstrated by Kuznetsova et al. (2005, 2006).	b2293
yfbU	None	UPF0304 family protein	Null	Cell death gene, function unknown, UPF0304 family	YfbU is required for MazF-mediated cell death after DNA damage (Amitai, 2009). yfbU is likely to be in an operon with sugar phosphatase gene ybfT. yfbU belongs to pfam PF03887, UPF0304 and COG3013. 4/174 YfbU peptide masses from MS analysis conflict with this start codon (Maillet, 2007). The YfbU upstream start is not conserved and the RBS for the current start is much better, so this protein start needs to be verified to resolve the conflict.	b2294
yfbV	None	UPF0208 family inner membrane protein	Null	Ter macrodomain insulation protein; inner membrane protein, UPF0208 family	The yfbV gene is required for insulation of the Ter macrodomain by the tidR and tidL 12 bp chromosomal sequences preventing unidirectional progression of the macrodomain constraining process into neighboring DNA regions, possibly by acting as a membrane tether for tidRL (Thiel, 2012).	b2295
yfcD	None	putative NUDIX hydrolase	Putative regulator; Not classified	Predicted NUDIX hydrolase, function unknown	Predicted Nudix hydrolase.	b2299
yfcE	None	phosphodiesterase activity on bis-pNPP	Null	Phosphodiesterase, function unknown; has activity on model substrate bis-pNPP	Null	b2300
yfcF	None	glutathione S-transferase	Null	Glutathione S-transferase; hydrogen peroxide resistance	Null	b2301
yfcG	None	GSH-dependent disulfide bond oxidoreductase	Null	GSH-dependent disulfide bond oxidoreductase; weak glutathione S-transferase; GSH-dependent peroxidase; hydrogen peroxide resistance	RpoS regulon.	b2302
yfcH	None	putative NAD-dependent nucleotide-sugar epimerase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Predicted NAD-dependent nucleotide-sugar epimerase; function unknown	3/42 YfcH peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is not removed (Maillet, 2007). GalE and YfcH are paralogs. YfcH has an N-terminal epimerase domain (pfam01370) and a C-terminal DUF1731 domain (pfam08388) often involved in cell-division inhibition.	b2304
yfcI	None	transposase_31 family protein	Null	Transposase_31 family protein, function unknown	Null	b2305
yfcJ	None	putative arabinose efflux transporter	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative arabinose efflux transporter	YfcJ may be an arabinose efflux transporter because a yfcJ mutant has increased intracellular arabinose, but not xylose; other compounds were not tested (Koita, 2012). Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS).	b2322
mnmC	trmC, yfcK	fused 5-methylaminomethyl-2-thiouridine-forming enzyme methyltransferase and FAD-dependent demodification enzyme	Enzyme; tRNA modification	Bifunctional 5-methylaminomethyl-2-thiouridine forming enzyme; tRNA (mnm(5)s(2)U34 methyltranferase (N-terminal); FAD-dependent cmnm(5)s(2)U34 oxidoreductase demodification enzyme (C-terminal)	Null	b2324
yfcL	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Uncharacterized protein, function unknown	YfcL is the prototype for a family of proteins of unknown function (Pfam PF08891).	b2325
epmC	yfcM	Elongation Factor P Lys34 hydroxylase	Enzyme; Protein modification	Elongation Factor P Lys34 hydroxylase	epmC(yfcM) mutants do not display the pleiotropic and slow-growth phenotypes observed for epmAB or efp mutants in either E. coli or Salmonella, indicating that the EpmC-mediated modification is is not required for the translation of polyproline-containing proteins, the function of EF-P requiring the EpmAB-mediated lysine34 lysylation (Doerfel, 2012; Bullwinkle, 2012). EpmA(YjeA) and EpmB(YjeK) are required to modify EF-P Lys34 by lysylation of the epsilon amino group; failure to modify EF-P with lysine results in a slow growth defect; EpmB(YjeK) may convert alpha-lysyl-EF-P to beta-lysyl-EF-P (Yanagisawa, 2010). A third and final EF-P post-translation modification enzyme EpmC(YfcM) is identified as EF-P-Lys34 hydroxylase; EpmC(YfcM) acts after beta-lysinylation of Lys34 by EpmA(YjeA) and EpmB(YjeK); EpmC(YfcM) adds an oxygen atom to the C5 position of Lys34 and does not modify the added beta-lysine; YjeA and YjeK were renamed as EpmA and EpmB, respectively (Peil, 2012).	b2326
smrB	yfcN	putative DNA endonuclease	Null	Predicted DNA endonuclease, function unknown	SmrB homolog SmrA(YdaL) has DNA endonuclease activity (Gui, 2011). The two E. coli Smr proteins were identified and named smr based on homology to the C-terminal endonuclease domain of MutS2 which has an N-terminal domain homologous to MutS but MutS2 itself is not found in E. coli; mutS2 is usually found only in strains lacking smr genes (Moreira, 1999). Although the mnemonic for Smr is small mutS-related, mutS2-related is used since the Smr proteins do not have a region homologous to MutS itself.	b2331
yfcO	None	DUF2544 family putative outer membrane protein	Null	DUF2544 family predicted outer membrane protein; cryptic fimbrial operon	yfcO is part of the yfcOPQRU'V cryptic chaperone–usher fimbrial operon; constitutive expression of yfcOPQRU'V in a delta fim background increases adherence to T24 human bladder carcinoma cells tenfold (Korea, 2010). YfcO is predicted to be a beta-barrel outer membrane protein (Zhai, 2002). The overexpression of YfcO causes abnormal biofilm architecture (Tenorio, 2003). YfcO is a DUF2544 family protein (Pfam, PF11245). The first 21 residues of YfcO are predicted to be a cleavable signal peptide.	b2332
yfcP	None	putative fimbrial-like adhesin protein	Putative structural component; Surface structures	FimA homolog in cryptic fimbrial operon	yfcP is part of the yfcOPQRU'V cryptic chaperone–usher fimbrial operon; constitutive expression of yfcOPQRU'V in a delta fim background increases adherence to T24 human bladder carcinoma cells tenfold (Korea, 2010). YfcP is one of 25 FimA homologs in E. coli K-12. The first 27 aa of YcfP are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b2333
yfcQ	None	putative fimbrial-like adhesin protein	Putative structural component; Surface structures	FimA homolog in cryptic fimbrial operon	yfcQ is part of the yfcOPQRU'V cryptic chaperone–usher fimbrial operon; constitutive expression of yfcOPQRU'V in a delta fim background increases adherence to T24 human bladder carcinoma cells tenfold (Korea, 2010). YfcQ is one of 25 FimA homologs in E. coli K-12. The first 18 aa of YfcQ are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b2334
yfcR	None	putative fimbrial-like adhesin protein	Putative structural component; Surface structures	FimA homolog in cryptic fimbrial operon	yfcR is part of the yfcOPQRU'V cryptic chaperone–usher fimbrial operon; constitutive expression of yfcOPQRU'V in a delta fim background increases adherence to T24 human bladder carcinoma cells tenfold (Korea, 2010). YfcR is one of 25 FimA homologs in E. coli K-12. The first 29 aa of YfcR are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b2335
yfcS	None	putative periplasmic pilin chaperone	Putative factor; Surface structures	Predicted periplasmic pilus chaperone; cryptic fimbrial operon	yfcS is part of the yfcOPQRU'V cryptic chaperone–usher fimbrial operon; constitutive expression of yfcOPQRU'V in a delta fim background increases adherence to T24 human bladder carcinoma cells tenfold (Korea, 2010). Overexpression of YfcS causes abnormal biofilm architecture (Tenorio, 2003). YfcS has Ig-like domains: pfam PF00345 aligns to N-terminal residues 30-147, and pfam PF02753 aligns to C-terminal residues 159-232. The first 28 aa of YfcS are a predicted type I signal peptide.	b2336
yfcU'	yfcT	pseudogene, FimD fimbrial export usher family	Putative membrane; Not classified	Pseudogene reconstruction, FimD fimbrial export usher family	yfcU' is a reconstructed pseudogene in the yfcOPQRU'V cryptic chaperone–usher fimbrial operon; constitutive expression of yfcOPQRU'V in a delta fim background increases adherence to T24 human bladder carcinoma cells tenfold (Korea, 2010). YfcU' is a member of the FimD outer membrane fimbrial subunit export usher family (Pfam PF00577) with N-terminal (Pfam PF13954) and C-terminal (Pfam PF13953) PapC-like chaperone-pilin complex-binding and pilin assembly domains, respectively. yfcU insertions in E. coli B improve fitness in glucose minimal medium, possibly explaining why yfcU' is mutated in K-12 strains (Schneider, 2000). The first 29 aa of YfcU' are predicted to be a cleavable type I signal peptide. The yfcU' stop codon 579 is translated as X in the reconstruction. 	b4661
yfcV	None	putative fimbrial-like adhesin protein	Putative structural component; Surface structures	FimA homolog	yfcV is part of the yfcOPQRU'V cryptic chaperone–usher fimbrial operon; constitutive expression of yfcOPQRU'V in a delta fim background increases adherence to T24 human bladder carcinoma cells tenfold (Korea, 2010). YfcV is one of 25 FimA homologs in E. coli K-12. The first 25 aa of YfcV are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b2339
sixA	yfcW	phosphohistidine phosphatase	Null	Phosphohistidine phosphatase affecting ArcB H-D phosphorelay; targets Hpt domain	SixA overexpression also interferes with BarA Hpt function (Ogina, 1998). Other SixA substrates are possible but unknown.	b2340
fadJ	yfcX	enoyl-CoA hydratase/epimerase and isomerase/3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Multifunctional anaerobic fatty acid oxidation complex FadIJ; has 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase and medium-long-chain-length enoyl-CoA hydratase activities; probable beta-hydroxybutyryl-CoA epimerase and dodecenoyl-CoA-delta-isomerase	Also known as beta-oxidation complex II. FadR regulon. FadIJ are in a high MW complex. FadAB and FadIJ are paralogs.	b2341
fadI	yfcY	beta-ketoacyl-CoA thiolase, anaerobic, subunit	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Thiolase of anaerobic fatty acid oxidation complex FadIJ; 3-ketoacyl-CoA thiolase	Also known as beta-oxidation complex II. FadR regulon. FadIJ are in a high MW complex. FadAB and FadIJ are paralogs. 	b2342
yfcZ	None	UPF0381 family protein	Null	UPF0381 family protein	Although yfcZ is slightly regulated by FNR in vivo, no effect of adding FNR in vitro was observed (Kang, 2005). YfcZ and YiiS are paralogs. The yfcZ-fadL divergent operon promoter region binds FNR and yfcZ expression is activated by FNR (Federowicz, 2014).	b2343
yfdF	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Uncharacterized protein	Null	b2345
gtrA	yfdG	CPS-53 (KpLE1) prophage; bactoprenol-linked glucose translocase/flippase	Phage or Prophage Related	Bactoprenol-linked glucose translocase, CPS-53/KpLE1 prophage; part of the GtrABS tripartite system for prophage seroconversion of type IV O antigen to serotype 4a	GtrB transfers glucose from UDP-glucose to undecaprenyl pyrophosphate before translocation by GtrA. GtrAB are highly conserved and the K-12 genes have been shown to be functional in partial converting Shigella flexneri serotype Y strain SFL124 to serotype 4a in conjunction with the serotype-specific glucosyl transferase GtrS and fully functional group 7,8 seroconversion when paired with the GtrX group 7,8 serotype-specific glucosyl transferase, as assessed by serum-induced agglutination and SfV bactieriophage sensitivty (Adams, 2001).	b2350
gtrB	yfdH	CPS-53 (KpLE1) prophage; bactoprenol glucosyl transferase	Phage or Prophage Related	Bactoprenol glucosyl transferase, CPS-53/KpLE1 prophage; part of the GtrABS tripartite system for prophage seroconversion of type IV O antigen to serotype 4a	GtrB transfers glucose from UDP-glucose to undecaprenyl pyrophosphate before translocation by GtrA. GtrAB are highly conserved and the K-12 genes have been shown to be functional in partial converting Shigella flexneri serotype Y strain SFL124 to serotype 4a in conjunction with the serotype-specific glucosyl transferase GtrS and fully functional group 7,8 seroconversion when paired with the GtrX group 7,8 serotype-specific glucosyl transferase, as assessed by serum-induced agglutination and SfV bactieriophage sensitivty (Adams, 2001).	b2351
gtrS	gtrIV, yfdI	serotype-specific glucosyl transferase, CPS-53 (KpLE1) prophage	Phage or Prophage Related	Serotype-specific glucosyl transferase, CPS-53/KpLE1 prophage; GtrIV(GtrS); part of the GtrABS tripartite system for prophage seroconversion of type IV O antigen to serotype 4a	GtrAB are highly conserved and the K-12 genes have been shown to be functional in partial converting Shigella flexneri serotype Y strain SFL124 to serotype 4a in conjunction with the serotype-specific glucosyl transferase GtrIV (GtrS) (Adams, 2001). Unlike highly conserved GtrAB, the CPS-53 GtrIV (GtrS) is quite divergent. The gtrIV gene nomenclature of Allison (2000) has been modified to conform to Demerec rules by droppingt he "EC" subscript and using the "S" one-letter code for CPS-53. The protein is referred to as GtrIV (GtrS). gtrS has a verified OxyR binding site within its coding region. 	b2352
tfaS'	yfdJ	pseudogene, CPS-53 (KpLE1) prophage; tail fiber assembly protein fragment	Phage or Prophage Related	Pseudogene, tail fiber assembly gene, CPS-53/KpLE1 prophage; C-terminal fragment	Null	b2353
yfdK	None	CPS-53 (KpLE1) prophage; conserved protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Uncharacterized protein, CPS-53/KpLE1 prophage	Null	b2354
yfdL'	None	pseudogene, CPS-53 (KpLE1) prophage	Phage or Prophage Related	Pseudogene, tail fiber protein, CPS-53/KpLE1 prophage	Null	b2355
oweS'	yfdO	pseudogene, CPS-53 (KpLE1) prophage; bacteriophage replication protein O family	Phage or Prophage Related	Pseudogene, lambda replication protein O homolog; CPS-53/KpLE1 prophage	Full length oweS is represented by 313 aa lambda replication protein O homolog c3192 of E. coli CFT073 (NCBI: 26109441). oweS' matches the C-terminal 235 aa of intact O protein c3192 and oweE' in e14 matches the N-terminal 78 aa of c3192 such that an oweE'-oweS' protein fusion creates an intact lambda O-type phage replication protein almost identical to c3192 indicating that the deletion of the e14 replication/lysis middle region may have contributed genetic material to CPS-53. GntR domain, O protein family represented by pfam PF04492. Phage_rep_O and IPR006497 PhageO_N motifs.	b2358
yfdP	None	CPS-53 (KpLE1) prophage; uncharacterized protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Uncharacterized protein, CPS-53/KpLE1 prophage	YfdP was previously annotated as a C-terminal pseudogene, but reanalysis indicates that a conserved protein of 120 aa, with an apparent RBS signal, should be predicted instead.	b2359
yfdQ	None	CPS-53 (KpLE1) prophage; uncharacterized protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Uncharacterized protein, CPS-53/KpLE1 prophage	Null	b2360
yfdR	None	CPS-53 (KpLE1) prophage; conserved protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Uncharacterized protein, CPS-53/KpLE1 prophage	Null	b2361
yfdS	None	CPS-53 (KpLE1) prophage; uncharacterized protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Uncharacterized protein, CPS-53/KpLE1 prophage	Null	b2362
yfdT	None	CPS-53 (KpLE1) prophage; uncharacterized protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Uncharacterized protein, CPS-53/KpLE1 prophage	Null	b2363
oxc	yfdU	oxalyl CoA decarboxylase, ThDP-dependent	Enzyme; Oxalate catabolism	Oxalyl CoA decarboxylase, oxalate catabolism; thiamine diphosphate cofactor; activated by ADP; tetrameric	Oxc has ThDP-dependent oxalyl CoA decarboxylase activity in vitro (Werther, 2010). Oxc is orthologous to O. formigenes Oxc. EvgAS regulon. the frc-oxc-yfdVE operon is adjacent and convergent on evgAS. Uninduced level is probably low since Lung et al. found no activity in E. coli host cells.	b2373
yfdV	None	putative transporter	Putative factor; Not classified	Putative permease	EvgAS regulon. the frc-oxc-yfdVE operon is adjacent and convergent on evgAS.	b2372
frc	yfdW	formyl-CoA transferase, NAD(P)-binding	Enzyme; Oxalate catabolism	Formyl CoA transferase, NAD(P)-binding; oxalate catabolism; dimeric	Orthologous to O. formigenes Frc. EvgAS regulon. The frc-oxc-yfdVE operon is adjacent and convergent on evgAS. Uninduced level is probably low since Sidhu et al. found no activity in E. coli host cells. Two monomers of Frc assemble as interlaced rings, defining the CoA binding site at their interface. Frc binds formyl-CoA and oxalate.	b2374
yfdX	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Secreted protein	EvgAS regulon. Represeed during growth on oleic acid (Han, 2008).	b2375
yfdY	None	DUF2545 family putative inner membrane protein	Null	DUF2545 family putative inner membrane protein	YfdY is induced during biofilm formation. YdfY is a DUF2545 family protein (Pfam PF10810).	b2377
ypdA	None	sensor kinase regulating yhjX; pyruvate-responsive YpdAB two-component system	Putative regulator; Not classified	Sensor kinase regulating yhjX; pyruvate-responsive YpdAB two-component system	YhjX is the only protein directly regulated by the pyruvate-sensing YpdAB two-component system: response regulator YpdB binds to the yhjX promoter region, YpdB overproduction increased yhjX expression 24-fold, and deletion of ypdABC prevented induction by the pyruvate in LB; the induction was restored by a ypdAB clone; YpdB overproduction indirectly increased yjiY expression 4-fold since yjiY has no YpdB binding site (Fried, 2013). The YpdAB and YehTU two-component regulators are paralogous; these two systems may be interconnected since they both regulate yjiY, directly by YehTU and indirectly by YpdAB; although not noted by the authors, both sytems also regulate yhjX, indirectly by YehTU and directly by YpdAB; the putative transporter genes yhjX and yjiY are the only two genes significantly regulated by YpdAB and YehTU (Fried, 2013). Caveat: experiments using overproduction of response regulators may cause artifactual cross-talk regulation. In addition to the C-terminal histidine protein kinase and ATPase domains, YpdA contains a central GAF domain. YpdA has six N-terminal transmembrane helices; helices 2-4 comprise a LytS-like domain. The alaC-ypdABC divergent promoter region binds ArcA and ArcA activates ypdABC expression (Federowicz, 2014).	b2380
ypdB	None	response regulator activating yhjX; pyruvate-responsive YpdAB two-component system	Putative regulator; Not classified	Response regulator activating yhjX; pyruvate-responsive YpdAB two-component system	YhjX is the only protein directly regulated by the pyruvate-sensing YpdAB two-component system: response regulator YpdB binds to the yhjX promoter region, YpdB overproduction increased yhjX expression 24-fold, and deletion of ypdABC prevented induction by the pyruvate in LB; the induction was restored by a ypdAB clone; YpdB overproduction indirectly increased yjiY expression 4-fold since yjiY has no YpdB binding site (Fried, 2013). The YpdAB and YehTU two-component regulators are paralogous; these two systems may be interconnected since they both regulate yjiY, directly by YehTU and indirectly by YpdAB; although not noted by the authors, both sytems also regulate yhjX, indirectly by YehTU and directly by YpdAB; the putative transporter genes yhjX and yjiY are the only two genes significantly regulated by YpdAB and YehTU (Fried, 2013). Caveat: experiments using overproduction of response regulators may cause artifactual cross-talk regulation. The alaC-ypdABC divergent promoter region binds ArcA and ArcA activates ypdABC expression (Federowicz, 2014).	b2381
ypdC	None	putative DNA-binding protein	Putative regulator; Not classified	AraC family transcriptional activator, function unknown; ypdABC operon	YhjX is the only protein directly regulated by the pyruvate-sensing YpdAB two-component system: response regulator YpdB binds to the yhjX promoter region, YpdB overproduction increased yhjX expression 24-fold, and deletion of ypdABC prevented induction by the pyruvate in LB; the induction was restored by a ypdAB clone; YpdB overproduction indirectly increased yjiY expression 4-fold since yjiY has no YpdB binding site (Fried, 2013). The alaC-ypdABC divergent promoter region binds ArcA and ArcA activates ypdABC expression (Federowicz, 2014).	b2382
fryA	ypdD	putative PTS enzyme: Hpr, enzyme I and IIA components	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative fructose-like PTS system Enzyme I; also contains HPr and EIIA domains	Null	b2383
ypdE	None	aminopeptidase	Null	Aminopeptidase	ypdE, frvX and sgcX are paralogs.	b2384
ypdF	None	Xaa-Pro aminopeptidase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Xaa-Pro aminopeptidase	YpdF has limited methionine aminopeptidase activity.	b2385
fryC	ypdG	putative enzyme IIC component of PTS	Putative transport; Not classified	Putative fructose-like PTS system Enzyme IIC	Null	b2386
fryB	ypdH	putative enzyme IIB component of PTS	Putative transport; Not classified	Predicted fructose-like PTS system Enzyme IIB	Null	b2387
yfeO	None	putative ion channel protein	Null	Predicted proton-ion exchange transporter	 ClcA, ClcB and YfeO belong to COG0038 and the Pfam PF00654 Voltage_CLC family.	b2389
mntH	mntA, yfeP	manganese/divalent cation transporter	Putative transport; Not classified	Mn(2+) transporter, role in bacterial response to reactive oxygen species; also transports Fe(2+), Cd(2+) and other divalent metals	Fur and OxyR regulons. Regulated by MntR. NRAMP family.	b2392
ybfP	None	lipoprotein	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Novel verified lipoprotein, function unknown	The first 22 aa of YbfP are a type II signal peptide.	b0689
yfeR	osmT(S.t.)	transcriptional regulator of yefH	Putative regulator; Not classified	LysR-type transcriptional regulator; responds to osmolarity and stationary phase, autoregulatory and regulates yfeH; required for swarming phenotype	YfeR and yfeH have been characterized primarily in Salmonella (Banos, 2010). The Salmonella ortholog has been named osmT in Genbank CAC44465.	b2409
yfeS	None	WGR domain protein	Null	WGR domain protein	YfeS has an N-terminal WGR-like domain, as does the pseudogene YehH'; WGR domains are associated with eukaryotic poly-ADP ribosylation proteins (PARPs) and may be involved with DNA-activation. The prediction that YfeC and YfeD form a toxin/antitoxin pair was tested and YfeCD do not form a toxin/antitoxin pair (Sevin, 2007; Christensen-Dalsgaard, 2010).	b2420
murR	yfeT	repressor for murPQ, MurNAc 6-P inducible	Null	Repressor for murPQ, MurNAc 6-P inducible	MurR is paralogous to RpiR and has both HTH and SIS phosphosugar binding domains. The divergent murR and murQP transcripts have complementary 5' ends (Jaeger, 2008). Required for swarming phenotype,	b2427
murQ	yfeU	N-acetylmuramic acid 6-phosphate (MurNAc-6-P) etherase	Putative regulator; Not classified	N-acetylmuramic acid 6-phosphate (MurNAc-6-P) etherase; GlcNAc 6-phosphate and D-lactate are primary products	A lyase-type cleavage mechanism is proposed for MurQ. Allows growth on MurNAc and anhydro-MurNAc as a carbon source. MurQ has SIS phosphosugar binding domain. murQ is the first gene in putative murQP-yfeW operon.	b2428
murP	yfeV	N-acetylmuramic acid permease, EIIBC component, PTS system	Transport; Murein sacculus, peptidoglycan	N-acetylmuramic acid permease, EIIBC component, PTS system	MurP contains only EIIBC domains. MurNAc is not a preferred carbon source as is supports a growth rate that is four times sslower than when using preferred carbon sources. Probable false positive lipoprotein prediction, Cys not conserved, 9 CM TMs predicted. The divergent murR and murQP transcripts have complementary 5' ends (Jaeger, 2008).	b2429
yfeW	pbp4B	penicillin binding protein PBP4B; weak DD-carboxypeptidase activity	Enzyme; Murein sacculus, peptidoglycan	Penicillin binding protein PBP4B; weak DD-carboxypeptidase activity	A mutation in yfeW(pbp4B) does not affect growth on MurNAc (Jaeger, 2008). yfeW(pbp4B) is probably transcribed as part of the murQP-yfeW operon and from a promoter within murP (Jaeger, 2008). YfeW(Pbp4B) was originally annotated as a 463 aa protein but has been corrected to use a more likely and well-conserved start codon and YfeW is currently annotated as a 434 aa protein; the first 19 aa of the revised protein sequence are predicted to be a signal peptide. YfeW(Pbp4B) was overexpressed and assayed using the 463 aa version with the unlikely 29 aa N-terminal extension; this is why the authors did not detect the predicted signal peptide and possibly why the recombinant Pbp4B was isolated in membrane fractions when it is likely to be a periplasmic protein (Vega, 2006). UPF0214 family, related to ampC. Probable false positive lipoprotein prediction, Cys not conserved. Non-essential.	b2430
yfeX	None	porphyrinogen oxidase, cytoplasmic	Enzyme; Transport of small molecules: Cations	Porphyrinogen oxidase, cytoplasmic; binds heme and protoporphyrin IX (PPIX)	The previously reported deferrochelatase activity of YfeX could not be reproduced; in addition to various dye-decolorization reactions, YfeX can oxidize protoporphyrinogen to protoporphyrin in vitro (Dailey, 2011). The acquisition of iron from exogenous heme when the foreign heme receptor HasR is expressed is reduced in an efeB or yfeX single mutant and eliminated in an efeB yfeX double mutant; overproduced EfeB complements a yfeX mutation, indicating some cytoplasmic activity of EfeB; the Dpp dipeptide/heme permease is required since the utilization of iron extracted from heme by EfeB in the periplasm requires an active EfeUOB iron transporter; it is reported that iron is extracted without rupturing the tetrapyyrol ring, but this is later contradicted; EfeB and YfeX facilitate the conversion of heme to protoporphyrin IX (PPIX) (Letoffe, 2009). YfeX binds heme and protoporphyrin IX (PPIX) in vitro and in vivo ((Letoffe, 2009). yfeX and efeB are paralogs in the DyP-type peroxidase family. Pfam 04261. COG2837.	b2431
yfeY	None	RpoE-regulated lipoprotein	Null	RpoE-regulated lipoprotein, function unknown	First 17 aa are a type II signal peptide.	b2432
yfeZ	None	inner membrane protein	Null	Inner membrane protein, function unknown	Null	b2433
ypeA	None	GNAT family putative N-acetyltransferase	Null	GNAT family putative N-acetyltransferase	Null	b2434
zipA	None	FtsZ stabilizer	Membrane; Cell division	FtsZ stabilizer; septal ring structural protein for cell division and growth	zipA is an essential gene. Overexpression causes filamentous biofilm formation. Complexed with YjdB. Divisome.	b2412
eutK	yffI	putative ethanol utilization carboxysome structural protein 	Null	Ethanolamine catabolic microcompartment shell protein	eutK has been characterized in (Brinsmade, 2005). The ethanolamine catabolic microcompartment, also called a carboxysome or metabolosome, is thought to help contain the volatile acetaldehdye intermediate (Penrod, 2006).	b2438
eutL	yffJ	putative ethanol utilization carboxysome structural protein 	Null	Ethanolamine catabolic microcompartment shell protein; forms a 2-dimensional protein membrane	eutL has been characterized in (Brinsmade, 2005). The ethanolamine catabolic microcompartment, also called a carboxysome or metabolosome, is thought to help contain the volatile acetaldehdye intermediate (Penrod, 2006).	b2439
intZ	None	CPZ-55 prophage; putative phage integrase	Phage or Prophage Related	Putative integrase gene, Eut/CPZ-55 prophage	Null	b2442
yffL	None	CPZ-55 prophage; uncharacterized protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Function unknown, Eut/CPZ-55 prophage	The yffL promoter region binds FNR and yffL is repessed by FNR (Federowicz, 2014). 56 bp downstream of the yffL stop codon is the first of four tandem intergenic repeats CPX-R(1-4) of unknown function. CPX-R(1-3) are direct 22 bp repeats and CPX-R4 is a 19 bp version.	b2443
yffM	None	CPZ-55 prophage; uncharacterized protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Function unknown, Eut/CPZ-55 prophage	Null	b2444
yffN	None	CPZ-55 prophage; uncharacterized protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Function unknown, Eut/CPZ-55 prophage	Null	b2445
yffO	None	CPZ-55 prophage; uncharacterized protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Function unknown, Eut/CPZ-55 prophage	Null	b2446
yffP	None	CPZ-55 prophage; uncharacterized protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Function unknown, Eut/CPZ-55 prophage	Null	b2447
yffQ	None	CPZ-55 prophage; uncharacterized protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Function unknown, Eut/CPZ-55 prophage	The yffQR operon promoter region binds FNR and ArcA (Federowicz, 2014).	b2448
yffR	None	CPZ-55 prophage; uncharacterized protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Function unknown, Eut/CPZ-55 prophage	The yffQR operon promoter region binds FNR and ArcA (Federowicz, 2014).	b2449
yffS	None	CPZ-55 prophage; uncharacterized protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Function unknown, Eut/CPZ-55 prophage	The yffS promoter region binds FNR (Federowicz, 2014).	b2450
eutA	yffT	reactivating factor for ethanolamine ammonia lyase	Null	Reactivating factor for ethanolamine ammonia lyase EutBC	eutA and eutB are separated by the Eut/CPZ-55 putative prophage remnant	b2451
eutH	yffU	ethanolamine transporter	Putative transport; Degradation of small molecules: Amines	Ethanolamine transport	eutH has been characterized in (Brinsmade, 2005).	b2452
eutG	yffV	ethanol dehydrogenase involved in ethanolamine utilization; aldehyde reductase	Putative enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Amines	Aldehyde reductase, converts acetaldehyde to ethanol; ethanol dehydrogenase	eutG has been characterized in (Brinsmade, 2005).	b2453
eutJ	yffW	ethanolamine utilization protein, HSP70/actin superfamily protein	Putative enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Amines	Putative chaperonin	eutJ has been characterized in (Brinsmade, 2005).	b2454
eutE	yffX	aldehyde oxidoreductase, ethanolamine utilization protein	Putative enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Amines	Aldehyde oxidoreductase	eutE has been characterized in (Brinsmade, 2005).	b2455
eutN	cchB, yffY	Ethanolamine catabolic microcompartment shell protein	Phenotype; Not classified	Ethanolamine catabolic microcompartment shell protein	eutN has been characterized in (Brinsmade, 2005). The ethanolamine catabolic microcompartment, also called a carboxysome or metabolosome, is thought to help contain the volatile acetaldehdye intermediate (Penrod, 2006). The crystal structure of EutN from E. coli CFT073 is in PDB 2HD3 (Forouhar, 2007).	b2456
eutM	cchA, yffZ	ethanolamine utilization protein, putative carboxysome structural protein	Phenotype; Not classified	Ethanolamine catabolic microcompartment shell protein; forms a 2-dimensional protein membrane	eutM has been characterized in (Brinsmade, 2005). The ethanolamine catabolic microcompartment, also called a carboxysome or metabolosome, is thought to help contain the volatile acetaldehdye intermediate (Penrod, 2006).	b2457
eutD	eutI, ypfA	phosphate acetyltransferase	Putative enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Amines	Phosphate acetyltransferase	EutD is a more efficient phosphate acetyltransferase than Pta (Bologna, 2010).	b2458
eutT	ypfB	cobalamin adenosyltransferase involved in ethanolamine utilization	Null	Cobalamin adenosyltransferase	The eut operon has been characterized in Salmonella.	b2459
eutQ	ypfC	RmlC-like cupin domain protein	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Cupin-like superfamily protein, function unknown	EutQ is the prototype for a family of cupin-like proteins of unknown function (Pfam PF06249). eutQ has been characterized in Salmonella (Brinsmade, 2005).	b2460
eutP	ypfD	putative P-loop NTPase ethanolamine utilization protein	Null	Probable P-loop NTPase ethanolamine utilization protein	The eut operon has been characterized in Salmonella.	b2461
eutS	ypfE	putative ethanol utilization carboxysome structural protein 	Null	Ethanolamine catabolic microcompartment shell protein	The eut operon has been characterized in Salmonella. The ethanolamine catabolic microcompartment, also called a carboxysome or metabolosome, is thought to help contain the volatile acetaldehdye intermediate (Penrod, 2006).	b2462
maeB	ypfF	malic enzyme: putative oxidoreductase/phosphotransacetylase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Malic enzyme, NADP-dependent; NADP-ME	Acetyl-CoA and cAMP are allosteric inhibitors. Malate-inducible.	b2463
ypfG	None	DUF1176 family protein	Null	DUF1176 family protein	The first 21 aa of YpfG are predicted to be a type I signal peptide	b2466
ypfH	None	palmitoyl-CoA esterase activity, uncertain physiological substrate	Null	Palmitoyl-CoA esterase activity; physiological function unknown	YpfH has in vitro esterase activity with palmitoyl-CoA and pNP-butyrate but the physiological substrate is not known (Kuznetsova, 2005).	b2473
tmcA	ypfI	elongator methionine tRNA (ac4C34) acetyltransferase	Enzyme; tRNA modification	Elongator methionine tRNA (ac4C34) acetyltransferase; tRNA N(4)-acetylcytidine acetyltransferase	Null	b2474
ypfJ	None	putative neutral zinc metallopeptidase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Predicted neutral zinc metallopeptidase	YpfJ could be cross-liked to FusA in vivo (Yang, 2012). The metalloprotease prediction is based on the annotation for PF04228.	b2475
alaC	yfdZ	glutamate-pyruvate aminotransferase; glutamic-pyruvic transaminase (GPT); alanine transaminase	Enzyme; Amino acid biosynthesis: Alanine	Glutamate-pyruvate aminotransferase; glutamic-pyruvic transaminase (GPT); alanine transaminase	The alaC-ypdA divergent promoter region binds ArcA (Federowicz, 2014).	b2379
bepA	yfgC	OM protein maintenance and assembly metalloprotease and chaperone, periplasmic	Null	Periplasmic metalloprotease and chaperone; outer membrane protein maintenance and assembly	BepA(YfgC) is an EDTA-sensitive protease involved in the degradation of misfolded outer membrane proteins BamA and LptD; BepA is required for proper disulfide bond isomerization of LptD; a BepA protease active site mutant loses protease activity but retains partial LptD refolding activity; BepA binds BamA, possibly through its C-terminal TPR repeats, and this may be responsible for the membrane association of a portion of soluble periplasmic BepA (Narita, 2013). LoiP(YggG) interacts with the periplasmic metalloprotease/chaperone BepA(YfgC) required for the OM attachment of LoiP(YggG) (Lütticke, 2012). BepA(YfgC) is a TPR-repeats-containing protein of the M48 protease family; BepA(YfgC) has four tandem TPR (tetratricopeptide repeat) domains at residues 309 to 460. A bepA(yfgC) mutant has increased sensitivity to several antibiotics (Girgis, 2009). Overexpression of BepA(YfgC)causes abnormal biofilm architecture. The first 27 residues of BepA are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. Gene disruption does not cause growth defect, unpublished data Y. Akiyama cited in (Sakoh, 2005). htpX, loiP(yggG), bepA(yfgC) and ycaL are paralogs. RpoE regulon.	b2494
yfgD	None	putative oxidoreductase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Function unknown	Null	b2495
hda	idaB, yfgE	ATPase regulatory factor involved in DnaA inactivation	Putative factor; Not classified	Required for regulatory inactivation of DnaA; multicopy suppressor of dnaN(ts)	hda is a dnaA paralog. The interaction of Hda with DNA polymerase III (beta) is mediated via the hexapeptide sequence and it is this interaction that may lead to events that result in DnaA inactivation. Hda-ADP is the monomeric active form for promoting clamp-mediated DNA-ATP hydrolysis (Su'etsugu, 2008). Hda has a verified CTG start codon (Su'etsugu, 2008). otherPDB (S. amazonensis): 3BOS.	b2496
yfgF	None	cyclic-di-GMP phosphodiesterase, anaerobic	Enzyme; Not classified	Cyclic-di-GMP phosphodiesterase, anaerobic; dual domain protein; defective cyclase domain; predicted membrane sensor protein	Overexpression of yfgF suppresses the motility defect of yhjH mutations (Girgis, 2007). YfgF does not have diguanylate cyclase activity and is an active cyclic-di-GMP phosphodiesterase (Lacey, 2010). YfgF has an N-terminal MASE1 transmembrane signaling domain, a defective diguanylate cyclase domain, then a C-terminal cyclic-di-GMP phosphodiesterase domain; the PDE domain has EIL instead of EAL. YfgF is expressed during anaerobic growth maximally in stationary phase at low temperatures and yfgF is regulated by FNR (Lacey, 2010). yfgF mutations increase biofilm formation and peroxide sensitivity (Lacey, 2010).	b2503
yfgG	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Function unknown	Null	b2504
yfgH	None	outer membrane integrity lipoprotein	Putative membrane; Not classified	Outer membrane integrity lipoprotein	YfgH is needed for outer membrane integrity as evidenced by membrane blebbing after vancomycin treatment, antibiotic hypersensitivity, lowered outer membrane protein content and elevated levels of DegP (Babu, 2011). The first 21 aa of YfgH are a type II signal peptide.	b2505
yfgI	None	nalidixic acid resistance protein, putative periplasmic protein	Null	Nalidixic acid resistance protein, function unknown; predicted periplasmic location	A yfgI mutation confers sensitivity to nalidixic acid (Škunca, 2013). The first 19 aa of YfgI are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b2506
yfgJ	None	DUF1407 family protein	Null	Required for swarming phenotype, function unknown	YfgJ is a member of DUF1407 and has 2 putative C4-type zinc fingers at positions 5-24 and 34-54.	b2510
der	engA, yfgK	GTPase; multicopy suppressor of ftsJ	Putative factor; Not classified	Multicopy suppressor of ftsJ, GTPase, ribosome biogenesis; depleted cells form filaments with defective chromosome segregation; Der-YhiI complex	Der-depletion alters ribosome stability and/or biogenesis, as evidenced by polysome profiles (Bharat, 2006). YihI stimulates Der GTPase, possibly acting as a negative regulator of 50S ribosome assembly and retarding early exponential growth (Hwang, 2010). Der has two tandem GTP-binding domains. der is an essential gene. Der and YihI form a complex, as does Der-delta200 (lacking the N-terminal 200 aa domain of Der) and YihI-delta45 (lacking the N-terminal 45 amino acids of YihI) (Kobayashi, 2009; Hwang, 2010). Der and YihA are paralogs, with YihA matching the C-terminal GTPase domain better than the N-terminal GTPase domain. The YhiI stimulation of Der GTPase activity requires both Der Ser16 and Ser216, indicating both Der GTP-binding domain activities are required for Der GTPase activity (Hwang, 2010).	b2511
bamB	yfgL	BamABCDE complex OM biogenesis lipoprotein	Null	Beta-propeller lipoprotein in OM biogenesis BamABCDE complex; WD40/PQQ repeats; mutant has pleiotropic envelope defects; required for swarming phenotype	BamB has an eight-bladed beta-propeller structure comprised of eight WD40/PQQ fold repeats (Gatsos, 2008; Kim, 2011; Heuck, 2011; Noinaj, 2011; Albrecht, 2011). BamB binds PQQ and is involved in the PQQ-mediated radiation stress response, bamB mutants are UV-sensitive, and BamB has PQQ-stimulated autophosphorylating Ser/Thr protein kinase activity (Khairnar, 2007). RpoE regulon. Deletion of bamB in strain LF82 resulted in a decreased ability to invade intestinal epithelial cells and a decreased release of outer membrane vesicles. A mutant of bamB in Salmonella enteritidis has lowered chick cell invasion, flagellar protein secretion, and motility. The first 19 aa of BamB are a type II signal peptide. HT_Cmplx45_Mem: HflC+HybC+BamB.	b2512
yfgM	None	ancillary SecYEG translocon subunit; putative anti-RcsB factor	Null	Ancillary SecYEG translocon subunit; putative anti-RcsB factor; membrane protein	YfgM co- purifies with the SecYEG translocon and a yfgM deletion further compromises the integrity of the outer membrane in either a surA or skp mutant backgrounds (Götzke, 2014). YfgM overproduction decreases acid resistance like an rcsB mutation does, YfgM is degraded by FtsH, and YfgM may be an anti-RcsB factor (Westphal, 2012). HT_Cmplx42_Mem: RcsB+YfgM (Lasserre, 2006). A native membrane complex of YfgM and PpiD has been detected (Maddalo, 2011). YfgM may be ribosome associated (Jiang, 2007). 7/55 YfgM peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is not removed (Maillet, 2007). UPF0070 family.	b2513
pbpC	yfgN	penicillin-insensitive murein repair transglycosylase; inactive transpeptidase domain protein	Enzyme; Murein sacculus, peptidoglycan	Penicillin-insensitive murein repair transglycosylase; inactive transpeptidase domain	PbpC has a penicillin-insensitive transglycosylase N-terminal domain. PbpC has a transpeptidase-like C-terminal domain that does not seem to be functional. PbpC is a membrane-bound periplasmic enzyme that has an uncleaved signal anchor	b2519
hyfC	None	hydrogenase 4, membrane subunit	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Putative hydrogenase 4 component C; membrane protein of Hyf electron transfer complex of FHL system	Null	b2483
hyfD	None	hydrogenase 4, membrane subunit	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Putative hydrogenase 4 component D; membrane protein of Hyf electron transfer complex of FHL system	Null	b2484
hyfE	None	hydrogenase 4, membrane subunit	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Hydrogenase 4 component E; membrane protein of Hyf electron transfer complex of FHL system	Null	b2485
hyfF	None	hydrogenase 4, membrane subunit	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Putative hydrogenase 4 component F; membrane protein of Hyf electron transfer complex of FHL system	Null	b2486
hyfG	None	hydrogenase 4, subunit	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Putative hydrogenase 4 component G; membrane protein of Hyf electron transfer complex of FHL system	Null	b2487
hyfH	None	hydrogenase 4, Fe-S subunit	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Hydrogenase 4 component H; membrane protein of Hyf electron transfer complex of FHL system	Null	b2488
hyfI	None	hydrogenase 4, Fe-S subunit	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Anaerobic respiration	Hydrogenase 4 component I; membrane protein of Hyf electron transfer complex of FHL system	Null	b2489
hyfJ	None	putative processing element hydrogenase 4	Putative factor; Not classified	Hydrogenase 4 component J; membrane protein of Hyf electron transfer complex of FHL system	Null	b2490
hyfR	None	hydrogenase-4 transcriptional activator	Putative regulator; Not classified	Formate-sensing regulator for hyf operon	Null	b2491
focB	None	putative formate transporter	Putative transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	Probable bidirectional formate transporter 2	Null	b2492
yfgO	perM	putative UPF0118 family inner membrane permease	Putative transport; Not classified	Function unknown, predicted permease, UPF0118 family	Null	b2493
bamD	ecfD, yfiO	BamABCDE complex OM biogenesis lipoprotein	Null	TPR-repeat lipoprotein required for OM biogenesis; in BamABCDE complex	BamD is comprised of five TPR (tetratricopeptide) repeats, the last four of which are involved in protein-protein interactions (Gatsos, 2008; Albrecht, 2011). BamD is homologous to N. gonorrhoeae competence protein ComL. The first 19 aa of BamD are a type II signal peptide. ybgF and bamD are distant paralogs. otherPDB(R. marinus):3QKY (Sandoval, 2011).	b2595
yfiP	None	DTW domain protein	Null	DTW domain protein, function unknown	Null	b2583
pka	pat (S.t.), patZ, yfiQ	protein lysine acetyltransferase	Enzyme; Proteins - translation and modification	Protein lysine acetyltransferase	In E. coli K-12 the patA gene name mnemonic has already been used for putrescine aminotransferase, precluding its use as a primary gene name for pka(yfiQ) (Shaibe, 1985). Seven E. coli proteins, RcsB, RutR, McbR, RpsD, MltD, YcjR, and YbaB, were found to be Salmonella Pat(YfiQ) substrates modifiable by lysine acetylation in vitro using protein chips (Thao, 2010). RcsB is acetylated at Lys180 by purified E. coli Pka(YfiQ) in vitro, blocking its ability to bind to DNA, and Lys180 is deacetylated by CobB in vitro (Thao, 2010). pka(yfiQ) was named pat for protein acetyltransferase in Salmonella where it inhibits acetyl CoA synthase Acs by acetylating residue K609 (Starai, 2004). Acetyl CoA synthase (Acs) is activated by sirtuin homolog CobB-mediated deacetylation of K609 in Salmonella (Starai, 2002). More than 100 proteins have acetylated lysines in E. coli (Yu, 2008; Zhang, 2008). CobB is likely to have a limited role in general protein lysine deacetylation since only four protein bands were changed in an E. coli cobB mutant (Zhang, 2008). A deletion of pka(yfiQ) did not prevent general protein lysine acetylation of the human chemokine RANTES when cloning in E. coli BL(21); instead, non-enzymatic lysine acetylation of isolated RANTES inclusion bodies by acetyl-CoA was demonstrated and non-enzymatic processes may also be responsible for general lysine acetylation of proteins in E. coli (d'Alayer, 2007). RNase R (Rnr) is de-stabilized by proteolysis in exponential phase relative to stationary phase due to Pka-mediated acetylation of Rnr Lys544 in exponential phase only (Liang, 2011).	b2584
yfiR	None	putative periplasmic inhibitor of YfiN activity	Null	Probable periplasmic inhibitor of YfiN actvity; required for swarming motility	A yfiR deletion abolishes swarming motility with only a slight effect on swimming and suppresses the swimming motility defect of yhjH mutations (Girgis, 2007). The first 22 aa of YfiR are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. The P. aeruginosa ortholog YfiN is an inner membrane-associated diguanylate cyclase whose activity is negatively regulated by the P. aeruginosa periplasmic protein YfiR; the P. aeruginosa OM lipoprotein YfiB counteracts YfiR inhibition of YfiN (Malone, 2010). YfiR might interact with the predicted N-terminal periplasmic domain of YfiN.	b2603
ypjD	corE(S.t.)	cytochrome c assembly protein family inner membrane protein	Null	Cytochrome c assembly protein family inner membrane protein, function unknown; eight predicted transmembrane helices	The Salmonella YpjD ortholog was named as corE in Genbank AF130857. YpjD is homologous to cytochrome c-type biogenesis gene ccsA, magnesium-chelatase subunit gene chlI, and heme-exporter gene hemX (Pfam PF01578).	b2611
yqiG'	None	pseudogene; fimbrial export usher family	Putative membrane; Not classified	Pseudogene reconstruction, FimD family, interrupted by IS2I; fimbrial export usher protein family	The first 21 aa of YqiG' are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. The first ten amino acids of this reconstruction come from the other side of the IS2I insertion. Probable false positive lipoprotein prediction, Cys not conserved. YqiH (putative fimbrial chaperone), and YqiG' (putative fimbrial export usher protein) are encoded in an IS2I-interrupted putative fim operon.	b3046
yqiH	None	putative periplasmic pilin chaperone	Putative factor; Surface structures	Predicted periplasmic fimbrial chaperone, function unknown	Probable false positive lipoprotein prediction, Cys not conserved. The first 25 aa of YqiH are a predicted type I signal peptide. YqiH has Ig-like domains: pfam PF00345 aligns to N-terminal residues 26-144, and pfam PF02753 aligns to C-terminal residues 160-227. YqiH (putative chaperone), and YqiG' (putative export usher protein) are encoded in an IS2I-interrupted putative fim operon.	b3047
yqiI	None	fimbrial protein	Structural component; Surface structures	Fimbrial protein, required for swarm motility; also required for flagellin production and methylglyoxal resistance	The first 21 aa of YqiI are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. YqiI (fimbrial protein, PF00419), YqiH (putative chaperone), and YqiG' (putative export usher protein) are encoded in an IS2I-interrupted putative fim operon. The C-terminal domain of paralogs yqiI and ybgO may be distantly related to FimA. An insertion in yqiI confers increased sensitivity to methylglyoxal and dihydroxyacetone in a gloA mutant background; yqiI mutants have reduced flagellin and impaired motility (Kim, 2007).	b3048
yqiJ	None	DUF1449 family inner membrane protein	Putative enzyme; Not classified	DUF1449 family inner membrane protein, function unknown	yqiK and yqiJ probably form an operon; PHB and NfeD/STOPP family proteins are often operonic. YqiJ was reported to be an NfeD/STOPP family protein by Chiba (2006). DUF1449 and NfeD may be part of a superfamily as a pfam Motif Scan of YqiK also hits the Nfed motif (E = 0.0029).	b3050
yqiK	None	PHB family membrane protein, function unknown	Putative membrane; Not classified	PHB family membrane protein, function unknown	yqiK and yqiJ probably form an operon; PHB and NfeD/STOPP family proteins are often operonic. YqiK overproducing cells are enlarged and contain opaque cellular inclusions (H. Plattner, University of Konstanz, unpublished data cited in Hinderhofer, 2009). The PHB domain is also called the SPFH domain, named after the proteins Stomatin, Prohibitin, Flotillin and HflK/C (Tavernarakis, 1999; Morrow, 2005; Rivera-Milla, 2006; Browman, 2007). YqiK belongs to subfamily SPFH2b (Hinderhofer, 2009).	b3051
cusC	ibeB, silC(S.t.), ylcB	copper/silver efflux system, outer membrane component	Putative transport; Drug/analog sensitivity	Silver and copper efflux, OMF lipoprotein component; outer membrane factor (OMF) of a tripartate efflux pump; confers copper and silver resistance; required for invasion of brain microvascular endothelial cells in strain K1	cusC is in the cusCFBA Cu/Ag efflux operon regulated by Cu and Ag. TolC, MdtQ, MdtP and CusC are paralogs. The first 17 aa of CusC are a type II signal peptide.	b0572
cusF	cusX, silF(S.t.), ylcC	periplasmic copper- and silver-binding protein	Null	Silver- and cuprous copper-binding protein, periplasmic; efflux metallochaperone; confers copper and silver resistance; CusF binds both Cu(I) and Ag(I) with high affinity, but does not bind Cu(II)	Soluble periplasmic CusF binds Cu(I) specifically but weakly, probably explaining why it was not detected using Cu(I)-MIRAGE (Kittleson, 2006; Sevcenco, 2009; Sevcenco, 2012). cusF is in the cusCFBA Cu/Ag efflux operon regulated by Cu and Ag. The first 22 aa are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. However, N-terminal sequencing revealed cleavage after residue 21; the CusF clone construct had eight additional amino acids added at the N-terminus; the cleavage specificity may have been altered by the additional amino acids or the prediction is incorrect (Fanake, 2003). 	b0573
cusB	silB(S.t.), ylcD	copper/silver efflux system, membrane fusion protein	Putative transport; Drug/analog sensitivity	Silver and copper efflux, membrane fusion protein; confers copper and silver resistance	cusB is in the cusCFBA Cu/Ag efflux operon regulated by Cu and Ag.	b0574
yaiX'	yaiF	pseudogene, interrupted by IS2A; hexapeptide transferase superfamily	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction, hexapeptide transferase superfamily; interrupted by IS2A	IS2A is inserted at codon 93 of the reconstructed yaiX' and creates a 5 bp target site duplication ATTAC. An intact allele of yaiX' is present in E. coli O6:K15:H31, strain 536 (UniProtKB: Q0TGD0). A close homolog can be found in E. coli 350C1 (UniProtKB: Q9ALL4). YaiX' is homologous to glucose-1-phosphate and other acyltransferases. YaiX' belongs to the hexapeptide transferase superfamily and has 6 hexapeptide repeats.	b4579
ylaB	None	putative membrane-anchored cyclic-di-GMP phosphodiesterase	Null	Predicted membrane-anchored cyclic-di-GMP phosphodiesterase	YlaB has an N-terminal predicted periplasmic CSS domain (PF12792) flanked by two TM segments and has a C-terminal cytoplasmic EAL PDE domain.	b0457
ylaC	None	DUF1449 family inner membrane protein	Null	DUF1449 family inner membrane protein, function unknown	The pfam10777 profile is based on alignments of homologs to E. coli YlaC, but is mislabeled with the function of the unrelated, YlaC sigma factor from B. subtilis.	b0458
maa	ylaD	maltose O-acetyltransferase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Maltose O-acetyltransferase	Maa contains hexapeptide repeats.	b0459
mscK	aefA, kefA, pnuH(S.t.)	mechanosensitive channel protein, intermediate conductance, K+ regulated	Null	Mechanosensitive channel protein, intermediate (smaller, MscS-like) conductance, K+ regulated; regulation of ion balance and turgor pressure at high osmolarity; also may affect activity of mechanosensitive channel MscS	Consistently co-purifies with the degradosome. Probable false positive lipoprotein prediction, 12 CM TMs, Cys not conserved. The first 33 aa of MscK are predicted to be a type I signal peptide; the first 40 aa of MscK enable export of a fusion protein into the periplasm (McLaggan, 2002). mscS, kefA, yjeP, ybiO, ybdG and ynaI are paralogs.	b0465
clpS	yljA	regulatory protein for ClpA substrate specificity	Null	Substrate modulator for ClpAP; directs protease activity towards aggregated proteins	ClpS is needed for the degradation of N-end rule substrates by ClpAP. clpS is a non-essential gene. ClpS is homologous to eukaryotic E3 ubiquitin ligase n-recognin (Lupas, 2003).	b0881
cspG	cspI	cold shock protein homolog, cold-inducible	Phenotype; Not classified	Cold shock protein G	The cspABEG deletion BX04 is cold-sensitive and forms filaments at 15C (Xia, 2001).	b0990
ycgX	None	DUF1398 family protein	Null	DUF1398 family protein, function unknown	YbcV (DLP12), YdfO (Qin) and YcgX are paralogs of the DUF1398 family encoding phage and prophage proteins found exclusively in E. coli and Salmonella; ycgX is not annotated as being within a prophage but it is only two kilobases away from the e14 prophage and may be a misplaced e14 gene.	b1161
xisE	Vxis, ymfG	e14 prophage; putative excisionase	Phage or Prophage Related	e14 excisionase, in defective prophage	Null	b1141
ymfI	None	e14 prophage; uncharacterized protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Function unknown, e14 prophage	Null	b1143
ymfJ	None	e14 prophage; uncharacterized protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Function unknown, e14 prophage	Null	b1144
cohE	ymfK	e14 prophage; repressor protein phage e14	Phage or Prophage Related	CI-like repressor, e14 prophage	CohE(YmfK) is a V4I variant of a putative CI-like repressor protein from Shigella flexneri bacteriophage V.	b1145
ymfL	None	e14 prophage; putative DNA-binding transcriptional regulator	Phage or Prophage Related	Function unknown, e14 prophage	ymfL is homologous to a protein from Shigella flexneri bacteriophage V.	b1147
ymfM	None	e14 prophage; uncharacterized protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Function unknown, e14 prophage	Over-expression of cloned ymfM induces filamentation (Burke, 2013).	b1148
aaaE'	ymfN	pseudogene, phage terminase protein A family, e14 prophage	Phage or Prophage Related	Pseudogene, phage terminase protein A family, e14 prophage; C-terminal fragment	Over-expression of the cloned oweE'-aaaE'(ymfN) fusion protein encoded in the K-12 chromosome induces filamentation (Burke, 2013). Full length aaaE is represented by a 577 aa lambda terminase large subunit protein A homolog EcE22_1263 of E. coli E22 (UniProtKB: B3I766). aaaE' is a C-terminal fragment missing the first 200 aa.	b4693
beeE'	ymfO	pseudogene, portal protein family, e14 prophage	Phage or Prophage Related	Pseudogene, N-terminal fragment, portal protein, e14 prophage	BeeE'(YmfO)' is named after the lambda portal gene B; BeeE'(YmfO)' is a member of the Pfam PF04860 Phage_portal family. Full length BeeE(YmfO) was an HK97 family portal protein now most closely represented by a 413 aa E. coli E22 protein (UniProtKB: B3I764). Phage portal dodecamers form the capsid pore for DNA packaging and extrusion and are head-tail connectors during phage assembly.	b1151
jayE'	ymfP	pseudogene, e14 prophage	Phage or Prophage Related	Pseudogene, C-terminal fragment, baseplate, e14 prophage	JayE'(YmfP)' is named after the phage P2 baseplate assembly protein J; JayE'(YmfP)' is a member of the Pfam PF04865 Baseplate_J family and also matches IPR006949 Baseplate_assembly_J-like_pred.	b1152
ymfQ	None	prohage e14 tail protein homolog	Phage or Prophage Related	Putative baseplate or tail fiber protein, e14 prophage	YmfQ (COG3778, DUF2313) is related to many prophage proteins predicted to be tail proteins and is distantly related by psi-blast to gp15.1 (NCBI: SPO1_95,ACI90996) of B. subtilis phage SPO1 (NCBI: FJ230960).	b1153
yciU	None	UPF0263 family protein	Null	UPF0263 family protein	Null	b1248
yciV	trpH	PHP domain protein	Putative enzyme; Not classified	PHP domain protein	YciV is a PHP (Polymerase and Histidinol Phosphatase; PF02811) domain protein; YciV also matches the PHP_HisPPase_AMP (NCBI profile cd07438) subfamily with a central insert domain that is predicted to bind AMP, however the central domain of YciV does not match the AMP-binding portion of cd07438. The trpH synonym originated in the Salmonella Genbank record U92714 and had been used for E. coli yciV based on an unpublished citation in U92714: Yang,W., Bai,Q., Skrypka,I., Zhao,G. and Somerville,R.L., The 5'-upstream regions of the trp operons of Escherichia coli and Salmonella typhimurium contain divergently oriented, TrpR-controlled transcriptional units, unpublished, 1997. However, it was subsequently shown that yciV is not regulated by TrpR using trpR mutants and the inducer indole acrylate (Khodursky, 2000).	b1266
yncI'	yncM	pseudogene	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction, H repeat-associated, RhsE-linked	YhhI and YdcC are intact paralogs; a full length YncI is found in strain O157:H7 (SP: Q8X7R5). An apparent frameshift at codon 247 was hypothetically reconstructed. The YncI' stop codon 330 is marked with an X and is a Glu in O157:H7.	b1459
intG'	None	pseudogene, phage integrase family	Null	Pseudogene, integrase homolog	Null	b1936
rbn	ecoZ, elaC, rnz, zipD	RNase BN, tRNA processing enzyme	Null	RNase BN, tRNA processing enzyme; matures phage T4 proline, serine and isoleucine tRNAs; zinc phosphodiesterase activity	RNase BN is required for MazF-mediated cell death after inhibition of translation (Amitai, 2009). yihY was previously thought to be rbn. Rbn can work on unstructured RNA (Shibata, 2006). Rbn has both endonuclease and exonuclease activites (Asha, 1983; Ezraty, 2005; Shibata, 2006). An RNase BN defect was originally identified in a BN mutant strain that blocked the suppression of a T4 head protein mutation by T4 tRNAs (Maisurian, 1973; Seidman, 1975). 	b2268
elaD	None	protease, capable of cleaving an AMC-ubiquitin model substrate	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Protease, capable of cleaving an AMC-ubiquitin model substrate; physiological substrate unknown	The elaABCD genes are named, without a phenotypic explanation, in Genbank U58768. 	b2269
yciW	None	putative oxidoreductase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	CMD superfamily protein	The YciW N-terminal domain belongs to COG4950, which is classified in the CMD superfamily (cl00460) in the NCBI CDD database; the CMD superfamily is named for carboxymuconolactone decarboxylase. The YciW C-terminal domain belongs to COG2128, which is related to TIGRfam TIGR01926, a peroxidase-related family.	b1287
folX	None	D-erythro-7,8-dihydroneopterin triphosphate 2'-epimerase and dihydroneopterin aldolase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	Dihydroneopterin triphosphate epimerase, tetrahydromonapterin synthesis	FolX and FolM are involved in the synthesis of tetrahydromonapterin, a major pterin that can exceed folate as an end-product of pterin biosynthesis (Pribat, 2009).	b2303
cbl	None	ssuEADCB/tauABCD operon transcriptional activator	Regulator; Amino acid biosynthesis: Cysteine	Transcriptional activator for ssuEADCB and tauABCD	Adenosine 5'-phosphosulfate is probably a negative cofactor of Cbl, a sulfur starvation regulator. CysB regulon. LysR family.	b1987
nac	None	nitrogen assimilation regulon transcriptional regulator; autorepressor	Regulator; Central intermediary metabolism	Repressor of gdhA transcription; RpoN, GlnG(NtrC) regulons; pleiotropic effects	LysR family. Downregulated twofold by GSNO in defined medium (aerobic).	b1988
flgB	flbA	flagellar component of cell-proximal portion of basal-body rod	Structural component; Surface structures	Flagellar basal body rod subunit	Flagellar regulon.	b1073
flgC	flaW	flagellar component of cell-proximal portion of basal-body rod	Structural component; Surface structures	Flagellar basal body rod subunit	Flagellar regulon.	b1074
flgD	flaV	flagellar hook assembly protein	Putative structure; Surface structures	Flagellar basal body rod modification	Flagellar regulon.	b1075
flgE	flaK	flagellar hook protein	Structural component; Surface structures	Flagellar hook subunit protein	Flagellar regulon.	b1076
flgF	flaX	flagellar component of cell-proximal portion of basal-body rod	Structural component; Surface structures	Flagellar basal body rod subunit	Overexpression causes mucoidy, decreases the amount of biofilm formed, and prevents flagella formation. Flagellar regulon.	b1077
flgG	flaL	flagellar component of cell-distal portion of basal-body rod	Structural component; Surface structures	Flagellar basal body rod major subunit	Overexpression causes a decrease in the amount of biofilm formed and prevents flagella formation. Flagellar regulon.	b1078
flgJ	flaZ	bifunctional flagellar rod assembly protein (N-terminal) and beta-N-acetylglucosaminidase (C-terminal)	Structure; Surface structures; enzyme; Murein sacculus, peptidoglycan	Flagellar rod assembly protein/beta-N-acetylglucosaminidase; bifunctional; autolysin	The C-terminal domain of the orthologous Salmonella enterica FlgJ has endolytic beta-N-acetylglucosaminidase activity, not the previously proposed FlgJ murein hydrolase or lytic transglycosylase activities; the Salmonella active site residues are Glu184 and Glu223, which correspond to Glu181 and Glu220 of E. coli K-12 FlgJ; several errors in Figure 2 are confusing: (1) in 2A Glu225 not Glu223 is boxed, (2) the S. enterica FlgJ numbering from 260 on is one too few in 2A, (3) the misnumbering led to Met300 being mislabeled as Met299 in 2B and to Asp283 being misnumbered in 2A; in addition the PubMed abstract (pmid 25248745) for this paper incorrectly notes Glu233 not Glu223, as an active site residue (Herlihey, 2014). The N-terminal rod-binding domain (Pfam PF10135) of FlgJ is required for rod assembly (Minamino, 1999; Hirano, 2001). The C-terminal domain of FlgJ is required for the autolysin activity that facilitates the rod assembly function of the N-terminal domain but the activity was misinterpreted as a murein hydrolase (Dijkstra, 1996; Nambu, 1999; Hirano, 2001). Flagellar regulon.	b1081
flhA	flaH	putative flagellar export pore protein	Putative structural component; Surface structures	Flagellar export pore protein, integral membrane protein	Flagellar regulon.	b1879
mhpD	mhpS	2-keto-4-pentenoate hydratase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	2-keto-4-pentenoate hydratase; utilizes MHP	Null	b0350
ycgY	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Function unknown	Null	b1196
mlaA	vacJ	ABC transporter maintaining OM lipid asymmetry, OM lipoprotein component	Transport; Transport of small molecules: phospholipids; Macromolecule synthesis, modification: Lipoprotein	Phospholipid import lipoprotein, outer membrane; maintains OM lipid asymmetry; required for intercellular spreading in Shigella	Mutations in any one of the mla genes confers sensitivity to SDS-EDTA and lead to accumulation of phospholipid in the outer leaflet of the OM (Malinverni, 2009). MlaABCDEF is a predicted ABC import system that maintains outer membrane lipid asymmetry, presuambly by retrograde import of phospholipids from the outer leaflet of the OM; mla defects are suppressed by overexpression of the pldA gene encoding an OM phospholipase that removes outer leaflet phospholipids under stress conditions (Malinverni, 2009). MlaA(VacJ) of Shigella is surface-exposed (Suzuki, 1994). The first 17 aa of MlaA are a type II signal peptide.	b2346
afuB'	fbpB	pseudogene, CP4-6 prophage; ferric iron ABC transporter permease gene fragment	Phage or Prophage Related	Pseudogene, ferric iron ABC transporter permease; C-terminal fragment; CP4-6 putative prophage remnant	afuB is homologous to an iron-uptake system gene in Actinobacillus. afuB'(fbpA') matches the last 116 aa of an intact afuB allele in O157:H7, 692 aa Z0459 (Q8X5J2). afuB is truncated by IS1B. InterPro used the gene name fbpB for afuB, but there is already an fbp gene in K-12; additional fbp genes with different mnemonics are discouraged.	b0263
rclB	ykgB, ykgI	reactive chlorine species (RCS) stress resistance periplasmic protein	Null	Reactive chlorine species (RCS) stress resistance protein; predicted periplasmic protein	RclR is a reactive chlorine stress (RCS)-sensing transcriptional activator that up-regulates itself 10-fold and the divergent operon rcsABC more than 100-fold (Gray, 2013; Parker, 2013). An rclB deletion has increased hypochlorous acid (HOCl) sensitivity (Parker, 2013). The first 22 aa of RclB are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. DUF1471 family (Pfam PF07338).	b0303
yaiY	None	DUF2755 family inner membrane protein	Null	Inner membrane protein, DUF2755 family, function unknown	Null	b0379
yaiZ	None	DUF2754 family putative inner membrane protein	Null	Predicted inner membrane protein, DUF2754 family; function unknown	Null	b0380
cspH	cspK	stress protein, member of the CspA-family	Phenotype; Not classified	Cold shock protein homolog, not cold-inducible	Null	b0989
ykiA'	None	pseudogene	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction, C-terminal fragment, PF10971 family	An intact 759 aa version of YkiA is present in E. coli B185 (UniProtKB:D6I6K1). Intact versions of YkiA are also found in E. coli strains O157:H7, O55:H7 and TW10509, annotated as 721 aa proteins although their predicted signal peptides are encoded in the upstream DNA. Many E. coli strains, including K-12, contain trucated pseudogene C-terminal forms of YkiA, usually annotated as intact genes starting at an in-frame TTG, giving a protein sequence of 93 aa; however an additional 20 aa encoded upstream of these pseudogenes matches the intact alleles. Intact YkiA and YdbD are predicted secreted proteins that are paralogous. The intact YkiA alleles are predicted to have 22 aa type I signal peptides.	b0392
ykfF	None	CP4-6 prophage; uncharacterized protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Function unknown, CP4-6 putative prophage remnant	Null	b0249
ypjF	None	CP4-57 prophage; toxin of the YpjF-YfjZ toxin-antitoxin system	Phage or Prophage Related	Toxin component of putative toxin-antitoxin pair YpjF-YfjZ; CP4-57 prophage	ykfI, ypjF and yeeV are paralogs. Cloned, induced ypfJ does not inhibit growth due to lack of stable protein expression; FLAG-tagged YpfJ is stabilized and does inhibit growth slightly (Brown, 2003).	b2646
ylbG'	None	pseudogene, DNA-binding transcriptional regulator homology	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction, discontinuous N-terminal fragment	A missing internal fragment causes a frameshift at codon 120, reconstructed with an X.	b0502
ninE	None	DLP12 prophage; conserved protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Homolog of phage lamdba nin, DLP12 prophage	Null	b0548
ycaR	None	peroxide and acid resistance protein, UPF0434 family	Null	UPF0434 family, low abundance protein; function unknown	Null	b0917
ycgZ	None	RcsB connector protein for regulation of biofilm and acid-resistance	Null	Connector protein for RcsB regulation of biofilm and acid-resistance; blue light, low temperature and stress induction, BluRF(YcgEF) and RpoS regulons	Blue light activation of the BluF(YgcF) anti-repressor relieves BluR(YcgE) repression of the cold-shock RpoS-activated small protein operon ycgZ-ymgA-ariR-ymgC operon; connector proteins AirR(YmgB) (at 28C) and YmgA (at 16C) stimulate colanic acid synthesis and inhibit curli production by an RcsA-independent activation of RcsB; RcsB activation is antagonized by connector protein YcgZ (Tschowri, 2009). ycgZ is induced three hours after cold shock in a pnp-dependent manner. Overexpression of YcgZ allows for growth on D-Raffinose as he soel carbon source (Notebaart, 2014).	b1164
ymgA	None	RcsB connector protein for regulation of biofilm	Null	Connector protein for RcsB regulation of biofilm; blue light, low temperature and stress induction, BluRF(YcgEF) and RpoS regulons	Blue light activation of the BluF(YgcF) anti-repressor relieves BluR(YcgE) repression of the cold-shock RpoS-activated small protein operon ycgZ-ymgA-ariR-ymgC operon; connector proteins AirR(YmgB) (at 28C) and YmgA (at 16C) stimulate colanic acid synthesis and inhibit curli production by an RcsA-independent activation of RcsB; RcsB activation is antagonized by connector protein YcgZ (Tschowri, 2009).	b1165
ariR	ymgB	RcsB connector protein for regulation of biofilm and acid-resistance	Null	Connector protein for RcsB regulation of biofilm and acid-resistance	AriR(YmgB) is a global regulator that is upregulated by cytoplasmic pH stress (Kannan, 2008). AriR(YmgA) mediates the 5-fluorouracil represssion of biofilm formation (Attila, 2009). Blue light activation of the BluF(YgcF) anti-repressor relieves BluR(YcgE) repression of the cold-shock RpoS-activated small protein operon ycgZ-ymgA-ariR-ymgC operon; connector proteins AirR(YmgB) (at 28C) and YmgA (at 16C) stimulate colanic acid synthesis and inhibit curli production by an RcsA-independent activation of RcsB; RcsB activation is antagonized by connector protein YcgZ (Tschowri, 2009). AirR(YmgB) stimulates acid resistance genes (Tschowri, 2009). AirR(YmgB), YmgA and YcgZ are connector proteins, small proteins which influence the activity of specific two-component systems (Tschowri, 2009). AriR may be a dimeric DNA binding protein. AriR is blue light, low temperature and stress inducible and in the BluRF(YcgEF) and RpoS regulons.	b1166
ymgC	None	Blue light, low temperature and stress induced protein	Null	Blue light, low temperature and stress induced, function unknown; BluRF(YcgEF) and RpoS regulons	Blue light activation of the BluF(YgcF) anti-repressor relieves BluR(YcgE) repression of the cold-shock RpoS-activated small protein operon ycgZ-ymgA-ariR-ymgC operon (Tschowri, 2009).	b1167
ymgD	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Predicted secreted protein, function unknown	The first 19 aa of YmgD are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b1171
ychQ	sirB2(S.t.)	SIRB family inner membrane protein	Null	Inner membrane protein, Salmonella sirB2 ortholog, function unknown	YchQ(SirB2) of Salmonella upregulates sirC expression, but E. coli K-12 does not have sirC ortholog (Rakeman, 1999).	b1213
ynaJ	None	DUF2534 family putative inner membrane protein	Null	Predicted inner membrane protein, DUF2534 family, function unknown	ArcA binds and repressses the ynaJ promoter (Federowicz, 2014). 	b1332
ymjA	None	DUF2543 family protein	Null	DUF2543 family protein, function unknown	Null	b1295
ynaK	None	Rac prophage; conserved protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Blue light induced, function unknown, Rac prophage; BluRF(YcgEF) regulon	Blue light activation of the BluF(YgcF) anti-repressor relieves BluR(YcgE) repression of ynaK (Tschowri, 2009).	b1365
ynbE	None	lipoprotein	Null	Novel verified lipoprotein, function unknown	First 16 aa are a type II signal peptide.	b1382
paaB	ynbF	putative ring 1,2-phenylacetyl-CoA epoxidase subunit	Enzyme; Phenylacetic acid degradation	Ring 1,2-phenylacetyl-CoA epoxidase subunit; phenylacetyl-CoA oxygenase, effector protein; phenylacetic acid degradation	PaaABCDE is a multi-subunit oxygenase that hydroxylates phenylacetyl-CoA. PaaABCE is purified without PaaD and added PaaD is not required for the formation of ring 1,2-epoxy-phentylacetate-CoA by the PaaABCE monooxygenease (Teufel, 2010).	b1389
yncJ	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	DUF2554 family protein with a predicted signal peptide	The deletion of yncJ confers resistance to chlorhexadine diacetate, which targets electron transport (Raivio, 2013). Cpx regulon. The first 22 aa of YncJ are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b1436
bdm	yddX	biofilm-dependent modulation protein	Null	Osmoresponsive gene with reduced expression in biofilms; function unknown	Overexpression of Bdm results in more efficient biofilm formation (Sim, 2009). The yddX gene is renamed bdm and the site of the MudX insertion is between the T and the G of the re-annotated ATG start codon (Philippe Lejeune, INSA, France, personal communication, Oct. 1999).	b1481
hokE	ybdY	toxic polypeptide, small	Component of addiction module (incomplete)	Putative small toxic membrane polypeptide; homologous to plasmid-encoded plasmid stabilization toxins regulated by antisense RNA; regulatory antisense sRNA antitoxin is SokE	Although sokE and hokE are intact, the start of the regulatory peptide gene mokE is missing from this remnant hok/mok locus, so the mokE (and hence hokE) is not expressed and the frame cannot be determined to annotate a pseudogene. LexA regulon. IS186B is inserted downstream of the hokE gene in K-12. 	b4415
cnu	ydgT	nucleoid-associated oriC-binding protein; H-NS and StpA stabilizing factor	Null	Nucleoid-associated oriC-binding protein; H-NS and StpA stabilizing factor	The Cnu(YdgT)-HN-S and Cnu(YdgT)-StpA complexes are protected from Lon degradation (Paytubi, 2004). Cnu is nucleoid-associated oriC-binding protein that binds to a 26 bp cnb site that partially overlaps a DnaA-binding site (Kim, 2005). Cnu is an HHA family (Pfam PF05321) protein.	b1625
yoaF	None	DUF333 family outer membrane lipoprotein	Null	Novel verified lipoprotein, function unknown	First 16 aa are a type II signal peptide.	b1793
yoaG	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Stress-induced protein, function unknown; involved in cadmium and peroxide resistance	The yeaR-yoaG operon is nitrate-regulated, primarily anaerobically, and is in the NarL and NsrR regulons (Constantinidou, 2006; Hsia-Yin, 2007). yeaR-yoaG regulation is FNR-independent (Constantinidou, 2006; Hsia-Yin, 2007). A yoaG mutant strain is sensitive to hydrogen peroxide and cadmium (Lee, 2009).	b1796
yoaH	None	UPF0181 family protein	Null	UPF0181 family protein, function unknown	Null	b1811
yodC	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Function unknown	Null	b1957
yoeA'	yoeE	CP4-44 prophage; putative disrupted hemin or colicin receptor	Phage or Prophage Related	Pseudogene, frameshift, 3' deletion; CP4-44 putative defective prophage	yoeA' is interrupted by IS2F after codon 103; an intact YoeA allele is present in O157:H6 as Z3159, annotated as a 719 aa protein, but Met-5 is used as the start site because of a much better RBS, so this trucated frameshifted pseudogene represents the first 167 of 715 amino acids.	b4582
yegZ'	None	pseudogene, gpD phage P2-like protein D	Null	Pseudogene, gpD phage P2-like protein D; C-terminal fragment	EvgAS regulon. yegZ is adjacent to the ogrK copy of the P2 ogr gene, indicating the presence of a P2-like prophage remnant. Intact alleles are present in several E. coli strains and Yersinia pestis phage L-413C (UniProtKB: Q858U5).	b2083
pinH'	ypjG	pseudogene, invertase resolvase family	Null	Pseudogene, predicted DNA-invertase fragment	pinH' may be a remnant of the nearby CP4-57 prophage.	b2648
yqaE	None	cyaR sRNA-regulated protein	Null	UPF0057 protein, cyaR sRNA-regulated	Deletion of ygaE confers resistance to various antibiotic compounds, including oxycarboxin, trifluoperazine, salicylate, PMSF, and the cell wall inhibitors cefoxitin and oxacillin (Raivio, 2013). YqaE is regulated by cyaR sRNA post-transcriptionally (De Lay, 2009). YqaE is a predicted membrane protein. Cpx regulon.	b2666
yqjK	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Uncharacterized protein, function unknown	YqjK is the prototype for a family of proteins of unknown function (PF13997).	b3100
lomR'	None	pseudogene, Rac prophage lom homolog	Phage or Prophage Related	Pseudogene reconstruction, Rac prophage lom homolog; outer membrane protein interrupted by IS5Y, missing N-terminus	lomR' is a truncated phage lambda lom gene homolog missing the first 68 codons, present in the Rac prophage. Z3310 is a full length lomR allele encoding a 199 aa LomR protein from E. coli O157:H7.	b4570
yecT	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Function unknown, possible secreted protein or lipoprotein	YecT is predicted by PATOSEQ, but not LipoP, to have a 13 aa type II signal peptide. First 18 aa are also predicted to be a type I signal peptide. Alternative TTG start at codon -7 could be translation start.	b1877
tfaX'	ylcE	pseudogene, DLP12 prophage	Phage or Prophage Related	Pseudogene reconstruction, tail fiber assembly gene, DLP12 prophage; C-terminal fragment	tfaX is a second C-terminal tail fiber assembly pseudogene gene in DLP12 in addition to tfaD. A stop codon at position 36 is translated as an X.	b0563
ysaA	None	putative hydrogenase, 4Fe-4S ferredoxin-type component	Null	Ferredoxin-like protein, function unknown	Null	b3573
wecF	rff, rffT, yifM	TDP-Fuc4NAc:lipidIIFuc4NAc transferase	Null	TDP-Fuc4NAc:Lipid II transferase; needed for ECA (enterobacterial common antigen) synthesis	Null	b4481
ysgA	None	putative carboxymethylenebutenolidase	Putative enzyme; Not classified	Putative carboxymethylenebutenolidase; dienelactone hydrolase homolog, function unknown	S9 peptidase family.	b3830
tatB	mttA2, ysgB	TatABCE protein translocation system subunit	Null	Protein translocase, Sec-independent; mediates export of folded and ligand-bound proteins	Forms a complex with TatAC.	b3838
ykgJ	None	UPF0153 cysteine cluster protein	Putative carrier; Not classified	UPF0153 cysteine cluster protein, function unknown	YcgN, YkgJ and YeiW are members of the UPF0153 family and have multiple conserved Cys residues, including an N-terminal CXX(X)CGXCC motif that may be involved in metal binding. The UPF0153 family matches the Pfam PF03692 profile that appears to have been mislabeled as a FliB profile.	b0288
ecpR	matA, ykgK	putative transcriptional regulator for the ecp operon	Putative regulator; Not classified	Putative transcriptional regulator for the ecp operon	The O18ac:K1:H7 NMEC ecpRAB(matABC) genes are required for E. coli common pilus (Mat fimbria) formation when cloned in K-12; ecpR(matA) mRNA was detected in K-12, but not ecpAB(matBC) mRNA (Pouttu, 2001). LuxR family.	b0294
ykgL	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Function unknown	Null	b0295
ykgM	rpmE2	50S ribosomal protein L31 type B; alternative zinc-limitation L31 protein	Null	50S ribosomal protein L31 type B; alternative L31 utilized during zinc limitation	YkgM(RpmE2) is homologous to ribosomal protein L31, but lacks a zinc binding ribbon domain. ykgM is up-regulated by Zn(2+) depletion and and a ykgM mutant grows poorly under Zn(2+) limited conditions (Graham, 2009). YkgM may substitute for RpmE under zinc starvation conditions since it does not bind zinc, allowing displaced RpmE to be degraded to salvage its bound zinc (Panina, 2003; Graham, 2009). Zur regulon.	b0296
rhsH'	ylbH	pseudogene, Rhs family C-terminal fragment with unique putative toxin domain	Null	Pseudogene, Rhs family C-terminal fragment with unique putative toxin domain; rhsC-linked	Null	b0499
acrZ	ybhT	AcrAB-TolC efflux pump accessory protein, membrane-associated	Null	AcrAB-TolC efflux pump accessory protein, membrane-associated	AcrZ(YbhT) is an accessory factor stabilizing or modulating the acrAB-TolC efflux pump through AcrB binding (Hobbs, 2012).	b0762
cydX	ybgT	cytochrome d (bd-I) ubiquinol oxidase subunit X	Null	Cytochrome d (bd-I) ubiquinol oxidase subunit X; required for CydAB activity	CydX(YbgT) binds to CydAB and is required for full cytochrome bd-I activity in cells; overproduced CbdX(AppX) can substitute for CydX in vivo (Vanorsdel; 2013). CydX(YbgT) and CbdX(AppX) are in cytochrome oxidase operons and have conserved cysteines that might help coordinate heme groups, although substitution C14S was functional, belying this proposition (Sun, 2012; Vanorsdel; 2013). YbgT was expressed in minicells at high temperature as a ~4 kDa protein, with no evidence of type I signal cleavage (Muller, 1997). Overexpression causes abnormal biofilm architecture and reduced motility. A false positive predicted 23 aa signal peptide cleavage would leave a 14 aa mature protein. cbdX(appX) and cydX(ybgT) are homologs.	b4515
ypjJ	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Function unknown, CP4-57 putative defective prophage	Null	b4548
ykfG	None	CP4-6 prophage; RadC-like JAB domain protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Function unknown, CP4-6 putative prophage remnant	Null	b0247
ykfH	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Function unknown, CP4-6 putative prophage remnant	Null	b4504
ykfI	None	CP4-6 prophage; toxin of the YkfI-YafW toxin-antitoxin system	Phage or Prophage Related	Toxin component of toxin-antitoxin protein pair YkfI-YafW; CP4-6 prophage	Over-expression of cloned ykfI induces filamentation (Burke, 2013). ykfI, ypjF and yeeV are paralogs. YkfI overexpression inhibits growth (Brown, 2003).	b0245
yceO	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Expressed protein, function unknown	Null	b1058
bssS	yceP	biofilm regulator	Null	Repressor of biofilm formation by indole transport regulation; global regulator, e.g. of AI-2 transport and motility genes; cold shock gene	BssS increases Mtr expression and indole import; BssS decreases AcrEF expression and indole export (Domka, 2006). bssS is specifically induced during mature biofilm formation (if the F plasmid is present), but is not induced in stationary phase; mutants have normal early biofilm adhesion as assayed in mictotiter plate assay but have reduced mature biofilm formation (in contrast to later work) (Beloin, 2004). bssS(yceP) is induced three hours after cold shock in a pnp-dependent manner (Polissi, 2003).	b1060
ymfR	None	e14 prophage; uncharacterized protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Function unknown, e14 prophage	YmfR is a conserved 60 aa phage protein of unknown function that is located between terminase and portal genes of e14, a position and length that is analagous to the 68 aa lambda W head-tail joining protein (NCBI: 9626246) that works with the lambda portal protein. The lambda W protein NMR structure (PDB: 1HYW) is known and it is has an alpha-beta-alpha structure just as predicted (Maxwell, 2001). However YmfR is predicted to just be alpha-alpha structure.	b1150
tfaP	ymfS	e14 prophage; uncharacterized protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Predicted tail fiber assembly gene, e14 prophage	tfaP is expectd to be transcriptionally silenced in the P-element P(-) orientation, although is may not be expressed and is not expected to be functional even if expressed since e14 does not produce infective virions (Plasterk, 1984; Mehta, 2005).	b1155
ymgE	tag	UPF0410 family putative inner membrane protein	Null	UPF0410 family predicted inner membrane protein; function unknown	The UPF0410 family is described as a family containing some transglycosylase associated proteins (Pfam PF04226) but the source of this annotation is unclear. YmgE has three predicted transmembrane helicies.	b1195
yifN'	yifO	PemK toxin family pseudogene	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction, PemK toxin family protein	YifN' is a PemK toxin family protein (PF02452); a corresponding PemI family antitoxin has apparently been deleted, probably explaining why yifN' has acquired a frameshift mutation. An apparent frameshift at codon 70 of yifN' has been hypothetically reconstructed. An intact version of YifN is present in E. coli O157:H7 as Z5287, with an alternative start.	b3777
yaaW	None	UPF0174 family protein	Putative enzyme; Not classified	UPF0174 family protein; mutation increases biofilm formation	yaaW orthologs are present in many bacterial genomes and yaaW is the second gene in the putative yaaIW operon. An ORF antisense to yaaW, referred to as htgA or htpY, has been described as having a high temperature survival function and as being subject to heat-induced gene expression (Dean, 1991; James, 1993; Missiakas, 1993). Evidence supporting the expression of the putative antisense ORF htgA(htpY) in vivo has been presented, although this has never been reproduced (Missiakas, 1993). A yaaW/htgA deletion mutant displays 3-fold increased biofilm production (Domka, 2007). Although there may be an asRNA on the opposite strand of yaaW (asRNA-yaaW), its functional relevance should not be assumed. A comprehensive characterization of the E. coli K-12 heat shock response found no evidence supporting heat shock-induction or RpoH-dependent in vitro transcription of the proposed htgA(htpY) gene (Nonaka, 2006). The antisense ORF opposing yaaW is not conserved and has an unusual amino acid composition. Long antisense ORFs occur often in the E. coli K-12 genome and are not considered to be likely protein-coding genes (Borodovsky, 1994). Skepticism is warranted when predicting long overlapping protein-coding genes in the E. coli K-12 genome as not a single case has yet been proven; actual translation should be experimentally demonstrated unequivocally. GFP transcriptional fusions to both yaaW and asRNA-yaaW were active; 5'-RACE was used to map the yaaW and asRNA-yaaW transcription start points (Fellner, 2013). The asRNA-yaaW ORF was proposed to be a functional protein-coding gene, but attempts to demonstrate production of an asRNA-encoded protein failed (Fellner, 2013). Nonsense mutations were specifically introduced, but not DNA sequence-confirmed, into the asRNA-yaaW ORF (referred to as mbiA) and yaaW in a manner preserving the amino acid sequences encoded in the opposite strand; slightly increased biofilm production was reported for both mutants, however no nonsense suppression or trans-complementation experiments were described, leaving reasonable doubt about the conclusion that the asRNA-yaaW ORF encodes a protein product (Fellner, 2013). yaaW-asRNA transcription has been detected in various microarray studies and appears to be subject to transcriptional regulation different than that of yaaW, but microarray data does not provide evidence for the translation of mbiA into a protein. A conclusive experimental demonstration of asRNA-yaaW translation has not yet been published that would warrant annotating the putative asRNA-YaaW ORF as a functional protein-coding gene.	b0011
ymgF	None	inner membrane division septum protein	Null	Inner membrane division septum protein, function unknown; binds FtsL, FtsI and FtsQ	YmfG has two transmembrane segments and localizes to the division septum, dependent on FtsZ, FtsA, FtsQ, and FtsN (Karimova, 2009). Overexpression of YmgF suppresses an ftsQ TS mutant (Karimova, 2009).	b4520
ghoT	yjdO	toxin of GhoTS toxin-antitoxin pair; membrane-lytic protein; stimulator of persister cell formation	Null	Toxin of GhoTS toxin-antitoxin pair; membrane-lytic protein; stimulator of persister cell formation	The GhoT(YjdO) toxin is a membrane-lytic protein that produces 60% non-viable ghost cells when overproduced and increases the formation of persister cells among the survivors; the GhoST toxin-antitoxin pair is proposed to define a new class of TA pairs, named type V, because the GhoS(YjdK) antitoxin is an RNase that cleaves the toxin mRNA; the NMR structure of GhoS (PDB:2LLZ) resembles the Cas2 RNase of the CRISPR system (Wang, 2012; Van Melderen, 2012). Toxin endoribonuclease MqsR degrades ghoS antitoxin mRNA but not ghoT toxin mRNA, amplifying the GhoT toxin production as a stress response (Wang, 2013). MqsR induction increases GhoT production; GhoT is localized to poles and does not cause cell lysis during normal physiology but does impair membrane function, causing a reduction of cellular ATP and PMF energy sources, a lowered metabolism, and an increase in the number of persistent (dormant) cells formed in the presence of antibiotics (Cheng, 2013).	b4559
sgcB	None	putative enzyme IIB component of PTS	Null	Predicted phosphotransferase enzyme IIB, function unknown	Null	b4565
arnE	pbgE2(S.t.), pmrL(S.t.), yfbW	undecaprenyl phosphate-alpha-L-ara4N exporter; flippase ArnEF subunit	Transport; Transport of small molecules: lipids	Undecaprenyl phosphate-alpha-L-ara4N exporter; flippase ArnEF subunit	Export via ArnEF is required for the modification of lipid A phosphates with aminoarabinose that is needed for polymyxin B and cationic antimicrobial peptide resistance (Yan, 2007). ArnEF is also known as the probable 4-amino-4-deoxy-L-arabinose(Ara4N)-phosphoundecaprenol flippase. The arnBCADTEF operon promoter region binds FNR and arnBCADTEF expression is repressed by FNR (Federowicz, 2014).	b4544
ecnB	yjeU	entericidin B membrane lipoprotein	Null	Bacteriolytic lipoprotein entericidin B toxin	The first 21 aa of EcnB are a type II signal peptide.	b4411
aaaD'	ylcF	pseudogene; DLP12 prophage; tail fiber assembly protein family	Phage or Prophage Related	Pseudogene, phage terminase protein A homolog, DLP12 prophage; N-terminal fragment, 	AaaD' is identical to the first 103 aa of bacteriophage lambda terminase large subunit DNA packaging protein A (GpA) (UniProtKB: P03708).	b4634
yibS'	None	pseudogene, Rhs family protein	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction, rhsA-linked rhs gene fragment	Four stop codons (3, 11, 25, 27) were translated as Xs.	b4650
ylbI'	None	pseudogene, Rhs family protein	Null	Pseudogene, internal fragment, Rhs family protein	The ylbI internal fragment is N-terminal, but missing the start codon.	b4632
yjbS	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Function unknown	Null	b4621
yciX	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Uncharacterized small protein	YciX has homologs in closely related species including Salmonella and Citrobacter. Residues 33-49 of YciX are predicted to be alpha-helical, constitute the most conserved segment of the protein, and have a weak (possibly spurious) hit (E = 0.02) to the PRK04307 profile using NCBI CD-Search; PRK04307 proteins belong to the DsbB superfamily of disulfide oxidoreductases, but the two YciX Cys residues are not conserved making it unlikely that YciX acts as a disulfide oxidoreductase.	b4523
yrdE'	None	pseudogene, yedZ paralog	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction, C-terminal fragment, yedZ paralog	Stop codon 76 is translated as an X. A frameshift at codon 33 was hypothetically reconstructed with an X. Although there are many yrdE' pseudogenes in other E. coli strains, there is currently no intact copy of yrdE sequenced.	b4646
ybdZ	mbtH(M.t)	stimulator of EntF adenylation activity, MbtH-like	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Enterochelin	Stimulator of EntF adenylation activity, MbtH-like; enterochelin synthesis	The adenylation activity of EntF is stimulated by the co-purifying MbtH-like factor YbdZ; the affinity of EntF for L-ser was improved 15-fold in the presence of YbdZ (Felnagle, 2010). A ybdZ mutant has a growth defect under iron starvation (Felnagle, 2010). YbdZ can cross-activate heterologous amino acid adenylation enzymes, which should be co-expressed with their cognate MbtH-like facors in a ybdZ mutant host (Felnagle, 2010; Boll, 2011). OtherPDB (M. tuberculosis): 2KHR. OtherPDB (B. pseudomallei): 2LPD. OtherPDB (P. aeruginosa): 2PST. DUF1922 family protein.	b4511
ylcG	None	uncharacterized protein, DLP12 prophage	Phage or Prophage Related	Expressed protein, function unknown, DLP12 prophage	ATG at codon 7 could also be the start codon. YlcG is homologous to ORF45 of bacteriophage 82 (UniProtKB: Q37874).	b4509
ylcH	None	uncharacterized protein, DLP12 prophage	Phage or Prophage Related	Uncharacterized protein, DLP12 prophage	Immunoblots of chromosomal SPA-tagged YlcH failed to show a band, indicating that if ylcH is a gene, it is not expressed under the conditions tested (Hemm, 2008).	b4588
yoeB	None	toxin of the YoeB-YefM toxin-antitoxin system	Null	Toxin in the YefM-YoeB toxin/antitoxin pair; has in vitro RNase activity	YefM-YoeB is the only toxin/antoxin pair involved in Lon dependent lethality. Homologous to Enterococcus faecium Txe toxin.	b4539
ymdE'	None	pseudogene	Null	Pseudogene, C-terminal fragment; ancestral gene related to fabD (malonyl-CoA-acyl carrier protein transacylase)	Null	b1028
ymdF	None	KGG family protein	Null	KGG family protein	ymdF and yciG are paralogs. YciG and YmdF are similar to small stress proteins (KGG family, PF10685) including GsiB of B. subtilis and yciG is regulated by RpoS.	b4518
insP'	orf1, orfA, tnpA, yncK	pseudogene, IS609 transposase A	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	Pseudogene reconstruction, IS609 transposase A	InsP' belongs to the COG1943/pfam01797 (Transposase_17) family. An in-frame stop codon at 1501382 (codon 96) is ignored to reconstruct this protein sequence; a conserved stop codon at the end of the gene has been mutated (TAG to CAG), so it is not translated in the reconstructed pseudogene protein sequence.	b4578
yneL'	None	pseudogene, AraC family	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction, C-terminal fragment, AraC family	An apparent frameshift at codon 38 has been hypothetically reconstructed wth an X.	b1506
yoeD'	None	pseudogene, CP4-44 putative prophage remnant	Phage or Prophage Related	Pseudogene, CP4-44 putative defective prophage; C-terminal fragment of a putative transposase	An example of an intact allele is Z4340 of strain O157:H7.	b4642
thiS	None	immediate sulfur donor in thiazole formation	Factor; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Thiamine	Immediate sulfur donor in thiazole formation; C-terminal thiocarboxylate; ThiF-ThiS complex	The ThiS N-terminus has been verified by MS/MS sequencing, the Met is not clipped and the measured mass is 7310.74 (Kelleher, 1998).	b4407
yheV	None	DUF2387 family putative metal-binding protein	Null	DUF2387 family predicted metal-binding protein; function unknown	Null	b4551
ypeB	None	DUF3820 family protein	Null	DUF3820 family protein, function unknown	Null	b4546
yegS	None	phosphatidylglycerol kinase, metal-dependent	Null	Phosphatidylglycerol kinase, metal-dependent	Lipid kinase activity demonstrated in vitro; physiological role uncertain (Bakali, 2007). Homologous to diacylglycerol kinase.	b2086
ykfJ'	None	pseudogene	Null	Pseudogene, N-terminal fragment	ykfJ encodes the first 69 aa of a predicted 379 aa protein. An intact allele is in F11 (Q8FKN0). The same deletion event apparently removed a 3' part of ykfJ and a 5' part of prfH, which are intact and adjacent in other E. coli genomes.	b0235
yrhC'	None	pseudogene fragment	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction, N-terminal fragment; putative cryptic immunity protein; HEAT domain protein	YrhC' is almost identical to the YibA HEAT-domain lethality reduction protein that is the predicted immunity protein for polymorphic toxin RhsA. YrhC' is an N-terminal fragment and has an in-frame stop codon at codon 82 that is translated as an X but encodes Lys in YibA.	b4552
ecnA	None	entericidin A membrane lipoprotein, antidote entericidin B	Null	Lipoprotein antitoxin to bacteriolytic lipoprotein entericidin B (ecnB) toxin	The first 18 aa of EcnA are a type II signal peptide.	b4410
srlE	gutA, gutE, sbl, srlA	glucitol/sorbitol-specific enzyme IIB component of PTS	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	Sorbitol-specific enzyme IIB component of PTS	Glucitol is a less common synonym for sorbitol.	b2703
mdlB	mdl	putative multidrug ABC transporter ATPase	Null	ABC exporter permease-ATPase, function unknown	Although MdlAB are similar to multidrug exporters, no overexpression resistances were found. mdlA and mdlB were fused by a frameshift mutation or sequencing error in the original report.	b0449
yeiW	None	UPF0153 cysteine cluster protein	Null	UPF0153 cysteine cluster protein, function unknown	YcgN, YkgJ and YeiW are members of the UPF0153 family and have multiple conserved Cys residues, including an N-terminal CXX(X)CGXCC motif that may be involved in metal binding. The UPF0153 family matches the Pfam PF03692 profile that appears to have been mislabeled as a FliB profile.	b4502
ypdI	None	putative lipoprotein involved in colanic acid biosynthesis	Null	Colanic acid synthesis protein; possible lipoprotein	RcsA, but not RcsF, is necessary for YpdI-dependent colanic acid synthesis. First 18 aa are predicted to be a type II signal peptide. First 23 aa are also predicted to be a type I signal peptide. E. coli-only protein.	b2376
ykfK'	yafY	CP4-6 prophage; putative DNA-binding transcriptional regulator	Phage or Prophage Related	Pseudogene, N-terminal fragment, CP4-6 putative prophage remnant	ykfK is identical to the first 64 amino acids of the conserved, full length allelic gene yfjR, encoded a predicted HTH transcriptional regulator.	b4628
ykfL'	None	pseudogene, CP4-6 putative prophage remnant	Phage or Prophage Related	Pseudogene, C-terminal fragment, CP4-6 putative prophage remnant	YkfL is very similar to YpjK of the CP4-57 putative prophage remnant, but appears to be missing the N-terminus. There are no homologs, so it is unclear if ypjK is a real gene, but it does have a very strong RBS.	b4627
ypjK	None	CP4-57 prophage; putative inner membrane protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Function unknown, CP4-57 putative defective prophage	YpjK is similar to YkfL of the CP4-6 prophage remnant.	b2635
rzoD	Rz1	DLP12 prophage; putative lipoprotein	Phage or Prophage Related	Probable Rz1-like lipoprotein, DLP12 prophage	Phage lambda Rz1 protein homolog. The first 19 aa of RzoD are predicted to be a type II signal peptide. rzoD is completed embedded in the +1 frame of rzpD.	b4510
rzoR	Rz1	Rac prophage; putative lipoprotein	Phage or Prophage Related	Probable Rz1-like lipoprotein, Rac prophage	Phage lambda Rz1 protein homolog. The first 19 aa of RzoR are predicted to be a type II signal peptide. rzoR is completed embedded in the +1 frame of the rzpR' pseudogene.	b4528
yobF	None	DUF2527 family heat-induced protein	Null	DUF2527 family heat-induced protein, function unknown	YobF is a post-transcriptionally regulated stationary phase heat shock protein (Hemm, 2008; Hemm, 2010). YobF is expressed during biofilm formation (Ren, 2004). YobF expression is repressed by OxyS overexpression (Tjaden, 2006).	b1824
mgrB	yobG	regulatory peptide for PhoPQ, feedback inhibition	Regulator; Not classified	Negative feedback regulator for PhoPQ regulon, membrane-bound	MgrB is an uncleaved small membrane peptide that can bind to PhoQ and can inhibit PhoPQ signaling, mediating feedback control of the PhoPQ regulon (Lippa, 2009). Mg(2+) stimulon-PhoPQ regulon. EvgAS-PhoPQ cascade enhanced-expression subset. False-positive lipoprotein (type II) and type I signal peptide signatures.	b1826
yaaX	None	DUF2502 family putative periplasmic protein	Null	DUF2502 family putative periplasmic protein; function unknown	yaaX expression is upregulated by colicin M (Kamenšek, 2013). yaaX was identified as a gene involved in cell wall precursor metabolism (Paradis-Bleau, 2014). The first 23 aa of YaaX are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. ypeC and yaaX are paralogs. The C-terminal half of YaaX is His- and Pro-rich, including five prolines in a row.	b0005
ypeC	None	DUF2502 family putative periplasmic protein	Null	DUF2502 family putative periplasmic protein; function unknown	The first 21 aa of YpeC are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. ypeC and yaaX are paralogs.	b2390
yaaY	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Function unknown	YaaY has an N-terminal lipobox LAGC, but does not have the other features characteristic of a signal peptide and is probably not a lipoprotein. EC-ST only.	b0024
yodD	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Peroxide and acid resistance protein, stress-induced	A yodD mutant strain is sensitive to hydrogen peroxide and acid (Lee, 2009). 	b1953
ynfN	None	Qin prophage; cold shock-induced protein	Phage or Prophage Related	Cold shock-induced protein, function unknown, Qin prophage	ynfN shows some similarity to the N-terminus of the transposition proteinTniB. ynfN is transiently induced after a cold shock. Possible pseudogene remnant.	b1551
blr	None	beta-lactam resistance membrane protein; divisome-associated protein	Null	Beta-lactam resistance protein; divisome-associated membrane protein; multi-copy suppressor of ftsQ1(Ts)	Blr localizes to the division septum and associates with FtsL,FtsI, FtsK, FtsN, FtsQ, FtsW, and YmgF; blr is a multi-copy suppressor of ftsQ1(Ts), obviating the need for salt-suppression of ftsQ1; blr mutations exacerbate the ftsQ1 phenotype (Karimova, 2012).	b4409
yciY	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Uncharacterized protein	YciY is present on a ~250 nt mRNA expressed in both rich and minimal media (Wassarman, 2001). YciY homologs are present in many enterobacterial genomes.	b4595
yncL	None	stress-induced small inner membrane enterobacterial protein	Null	Small inner membrane stress-induced enterobacterial protein; function unknown	YncL is a stationary phase-induced small inner membrane heat shock protein of unknown function (Wassarman, 2001; Hemm; 2008: Alix, 2009; Hemm, 2010; Hobbs, 2011; Fontaine, 2011). The yncL-ydcXY divergent operon promoter region binds FNR (Federowicz, 2014). YncL orthologs are present in E. coli, Salmonella, Klebsiella, and Enterobacter genomes.	b4598
yneM	None	inner membrane-associated protein	Null	Expressed protein, membrane-associated, function unknown; regulated by PhoPQ and Mg(2+)	The sRNA mgrR and the adjacent converging protein gene yneM are conserved and are also expressed in Salmonella (Sittka, 2008). The 5' end of the yneM mRNA was mapped (Moon, 2009).	b4599
ypfM	None	stress-induced small enterobacterial protein	Null	Stress-induced enterobacterial small protein, function unknown	YncL is a stationary phase-induced small inner membrane heat shock protein of unknown function (Wassarman, 2001; Hemm; 2008; Hemm, 2010). ypfM was identified during a hunt for new sRNA genes because it displays a variable third position conservation pattern indicative of a coding region (Wassarman, 2001). YpfM orthologs are present in various enterobacterial genomes.	b4606
yibT	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Function unknown; homologs in Salmonella, Klebsiella, and Yersinia	Null	b4554
ytjA	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Function unknown; homologs widespread in Bacteria	Null	b4568
ypfN	None	putative membrane protein, UPF0370 family	Null	Predicted membrane protein, UPF0370 family, function unknown	There are YpfN homologs in Salmonella, Yersinia and other bacteria.	b4547
ysaB	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Possible lipoprotein, function unknown	The first 17 aa of YsaB are predicted to be a type II signal peptide, but there is no charged residue. YsaB is homologous to S. typhimurium STM3657 (SP Q8ZL94). EC-ST-only.	b4553
ytcA	None	putative inner membrane efflux pump-associated DUF1656 family protein	Null	DUF1656 family predicted inner membrane protein; efflux pump associated; function unknown; possible lipoprotein	YtcA, AaeX and YdhI are DUF1656 family (Pfam PF07869) predicted inner membrane proteins; all these E. coli DUF1656 family proteins are encoded in the first genes of known or predicted efflux pump operons, preceding the membrane fusion protein genes.	b4622
tisB	ysdA, ysdB	toxic membrane persister formation peptide, LexA-regulated	Null	Toxin involved in persister formation, LexA regulon; membrane peptide that decreases proton motive force and ATP levels; expression regulated by the divergent istR-1 sRNA antitoxin	TisB is required to form multidrug-resistant persister cells in response to treatment with ciprofloxacin, an antibiotic that causes DNA damage (Dorr, 2010). A ~400 bp LexA-regulated mRNA covering tisB has been observed in Northern blots (De Henestrosa et al, 2000). lstR-1 mediates antisense inhibition of TisB translation and this inhibition may be mitigated during the SOS response by the the istR-2 sRNA which has a LexA-regulated promoter upstream of the IstR-1 promoter (Vogel, 2004). The antisense sRNA IstR-1 binds to and blocks an upstream ribosome loading standby site required for translation initiation of TisB; ribosomes probably slide to the highly structured downstream TIR after loading; this results in RNase III cleavage of the active, processed +42 tisB mRNA to form an inactive +106 tisB mRNA (Darfeuille, 2007). Overexpression of tisB mRNA inhibits the SOS response including UV sensitivity and a delayed induction of recA; TisB toxin is implicated by two internal sense-to-nonsense mutations that cause premature translation termination and abolish the SOS inhibition, however a start codon mutation with normal amounts of tisB RNA does not block the effect, indicating that the TisB toxin may not be the effector; the unprocessed tisB pre-mRNA functions as an antisense RNA regulator of uxaA, resulting in cleavage of uxaA mRNA at the antisense site and also reciprocal cleavage and activation of the tisB pre-mRNA (forming the +42 tisB RNA); the tisB pre-RNA probably regulates dinD translation also; the tisB SOS defect is dependent on the presence of the uxaA antisense target and the dinD putative antisense target (Weel-Sneve, 2008). Although plasmid mutations indicate TisB is expressible, chromosomal expression has not been detected. The internal stop codon TisB mutations may block the SOS inhibition by reducing the amount of tisB pre-RNA present (which was not measured) and that the pre-RNA antisense regulation is solely responsible for the SOS inhibition, possibly explaining the discrepancy between the SOS inhibition phenotypes of the start codon mutation and the internal stop mutations observed by Weel-Sneve, 2008. TisB is conserved in Salmonella, but the previously annotated protein TisA is not conserved; tisA is not translated. Mutating the TisB translation start site blocks the toxic effect (Vogel, 2004). Previously tisA(ysdA) and tisB(ysdB) were fused into one hypothetical ORF by frameshift reconstruction, but this region was resequenced by De Henestrosa et al, 2000, who confirm the sequence is correct, so two separate ORFs were reinstated, but tisA has now been removed as a dubious annotation.	b4618
ldrA	None	toxic polypeptide, small	Null	Toxic peptide LdrA, in LDR-A repeat; proposed addiction module, with antisense sRNA rdlA	Null	b4419
ldrB	None	toxic polypeptide, small	Null	Toxic peptide LdrB, in LDR-B repeat; proposed addiction module, with antisense sRNA rdlB	Null	b4421
ldrC	None	toxic polypeptide, small	Null	Toxic peptide LdrC, in LDR-C repeat; proposed addiction module, with antisense sRNA rdlC	Null	b4423
ldrD	None	toxic polypeptide, small	Null	Toxic peptide LdrD, in LDR-D repeat; proposed addiction module, with antisense sRNA rdlD	Null	b4453
yjdP	None	putative periplasmic protein	Null	Predicted periplasmic protein, function unknown	The first 22 aa of YjdP are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. yjdP is annotated on the opposite strand of the now defunct phnQ. Mature YjdP is predicted to consist 66% of just 4 aa: R,D,Q, E.	b4487
yjhV'	None	pseudogene, KpLE2 phage-like element	Null	Pseudogene, C-terminal fragment	The first 140 residues of YjhV are truncated by 1S911B. YjhV is homologous to a conserved oxidoreductase family of unknown function, such as E. carotovora SCRI1043 (UniProtKB: Q6D309).	b4286
torI	None	response regulator inhibitor for tor operon	Null	Inhibitor of TorR response regulator, CPS-53/KpLE1 exisionase; blocks torABC transcription	The response regulator inhibitor TorI belongs to a new family of atypical excisionases pfam PF05930 Phage_AlpA. Phage origin.	b4501
yceQ	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Function unknown	Null	b1085
croE	ymfT	e14 prophage; putative DNA-binding transcriptional regulator	Phage or Prophage Related	Cro-like repressor, e14 prophage	CroE(YmfT) is a C48Y variant of a putative Cro-like repressor protein from Shigella flexneri bacteriophage V.	b1146
ymgG	None	UPF0757 family protein	Null	UPF0757 family protein, function unknown; glycine-rich	Null	b1172
yoaI	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Function unknown	Immunoblots of chromosomal SPA-tagged YoaI failed to show a band, indicating that if yoaI is a gene, it is not expressed under the conditions tested (Hemm, 2008).	b1788
insX'	ykgN	pseudogene, IS3 family transposase family	Null	Pseudogene, IS3 family transposase, ISX' in CP4-6 prophage; N-terminal fragment	InsX' is the N-terminus of an IS3 family transposase A encoded in the partial IS3-related ISX' element in the putative defective prophage CP4-6. InsX' matches 81 of the first 83 aa of Shigella flexneri ISEhe3-like 92 aa orfA transposase (UniProtKB: Q0T4M3). The ISEhe3 prototype in Pantoea agglomerans (GenBank: AF327445) encodes a 94 aa orfA transposase (UniProtKB: Q0T4M3) that is 90% identical (75/83 aa) to InsX'. The Q0T4M3 start codon corresponds to a GTG 2 codons upstream of the insX' ATG start codon. However this GTG does not have as good an RBS as the annotated insX' ATG start codon.	b4505
ybfQ'	None	pseudogene, H repeat-associated protein	Null	Pseudogene, H repeat-associated protein, RhsC-linked; putative defective transposase	N-terminal domain fragment, matches first 79 residues of paralogs YhhI, YdcC, YbfD, pseudogene YbfL, and the more distant pseudogene paralog YncI. Putative transposase fragment.	b4514
ymjC'	None	pseudogene	Null	Pseudogene, N-terminal fragment	Full length YmjC is 212 aa, such as Z2446 of O157:H7 EDL933 (Q8X8L9); the first 46 residues, the YmjC fragment, are represented. 14 additional residues might be translated as KMQTTSGKKVIQDR, until a new stop codon, making a 60 residue YmjC translated pseudogene.	b4525
hicA	yncN	mRNA interferase toxin of the HicAB toxin-antitoxin system	Null	mRNA interferase toxin of hicAB TA pair; required for swarming phenotype	HicB is the antitoxin for the adjacent HicA toxin (Jorgensen, 2009).	b4532
ynfO	None	uncharacterized protein, Qin prophage	Phage or Prophage Related	Function unknown, Qin prophage	Null	b4533
yniD	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Expressed protein, function unknown	An ORF homologous to yniD is unannotated in the Yersinia pseudotuberculosis genome. The second ATG is the conserved start and has a better RBS than the first ATG.	b4535
yobH	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Function unknown	Null	b4536
yoeF'	None	pseudogene, CP4-44 putative prophage remnant	Phage or Prophage Related	Pseudogene, CP4-44 putative defective prophage; C-terminal fragment	YoeF is homologous to Clostridium tetani ethanolamine utilization gene eutP and Salmonella pduV. Predicted to be small GTPase family member. An example of an intact allele is SP: Q1RPC4.	b4538
yohO	None	putative membrane protein	Null	Predicted membrane protein, function unknown	YohO is expressed during exponential and stationary phase growth (Hemm, 2008).	b4542
ypaA'	None	pseudogene, C-terminal fragment, Transposase_31 family	Null	Pseudogene, C-terminal fragment, Transposase_31 family	YpaA' appears to be a C-terminal pseudogene fragment of a Transposase_31 family protein; an intact alelle of YpaA is UniProtKB L2Z6DZ.	b4543
ypdJ'	None	exisonase remnant	Null	Pseudogene, exisonase fragment, CPS-53/KpLE1 prophage	YpdJ appears to be a pseudogene fragment encoding the N-terminus (minus the start codon) of an excisionase.	b4545
yicS	None	putative periplasmic protein	Null	Predicted periplasmic protein, function unknown	YicS has a Salmonella homolog. The first 21 aa of YicS are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. Pathogenicity island eip (EAEC strain 042) has inserted in the yicS-nepI intergenic region.	b4555
yjhX	None	UPF0386 family protein	Null	UPF0386 family protein, function unknown	DUF2084 domain.	b4566
dinQ	None	UV-inducible membrane toxin, DinQ-AgrB type I toxin-antitoxin system	Null	UV-inducible membrane toxin; DinQ-AgrB type I toxin-antitoxin system	DinQ is a 27 amino acid UV-inducible toxin that depolarizes the cell membrane, decreases ATP concentration, and affects nucleoid structure after UV exposure; DinQ and the agrB sRNA antitoxin constitute a novel type I-like toxin-antitoxin module that affects the cell response to UV-induced DNA damage; three lines of evidence demonstrate that the agrA sRNA antitoxin can neutralize the DinQ toxin: (1) an agrA deletion mutant is UV-sensitive, grows slowly, and is recessive, while the dinQ agrAB deletion strain is not UV-sensitive and grows normally (agrA single mutants have no phenotype, indicating that the agrA sRNA is inactive), (2) a clone with both agrA and dinQ does not display the UV-sensitivity caused by introducing a dinQ clone alone into wildtype cells, and (3) a dinQ clone cannot be introduced into an agrB mutant strain (Weel-Sneve, 2013). Immunoblots of chromosomal SPA-tagged DinQ failed to show a band, indicating that dinQ was not expressed under the conditions tested (Hemm, 2008; Hemm, 2010). LexA regulon. DinQ has a single predicted transmembrane helix.	b4613
ykgO	rpmJ2	RpmJ-like protein	Null	Expressed protein, function unknown, RpmJ paralog	YkgO is homologous to ribosomal protein L36.	b4506
ykgP'	None	pseudogene, oxidoreductase family	Null	Pseudogene, oxidoreductase fragment	YkgP encodes the C-terminal 29 aa of a putative oxidoreductase. An intact version is present as Z0369 in O157:H7. The ykgP pseudogene is present in CFT073, annotated as small ORF C0408.	b4630
yzgL'	None	pseudogene, periplasmic solute binding protein homology	Null	Pseudogene, C-terminal solute binding domain	YzgL encodes the first 73/501 aa; a full length YzgL from EAEC strain 55989 is in SP B7L4V9. B7L4V9 is 505 aa and starts at an ATG 4 codons upstream, but this upstream start codon has no RBS associated with it. The C-terminal domain of full-length YzgL belongs to the PstS superfamily of solute binding domains found in both periplasmic binding proteins and in LysR family transcriptional regulators. The N-terminal domain of full-length YzgL has no CDD hits with E values < 0.01, but the two best hits suggest that the N-terminal domain is not a DNA-binding domain, but rather the permease component of a transport system, possibly an ion transporter. These CDD (at NCBI) hits are to (1) COG2998 (TupB), weakly predicting (E = 0.02) that this domain is related to the permease component of an ABC-type tungstate transport system, and (2) COG3263, weakly predicting (E = 0.10) that this domain is related to NhaP-type Na+/H+ and K+/H+ antiporters. Full-length YzgL may be a hydrid transporter with an N-terminal integral membrane domain and a C-terminal periplasmic solute-binding domain. Consistent with this interpretation, TMHMM predicts five transmembrane segments (TMs) in the first 203 residues and no TMs in the C-terminal 300 residues, whci is predicted by TMHMM to be outside (periplasmic). Signal-P HMM predicts a 22 signal peptide, but this may be a false positive due to an N-terminal transmembrane region. The yzgL' pseudogene is preceded by a putative attenuator structure.	b3427
ttcC'	None	pseudogene, prophage Rac integration site ttcA duplication	Phage or Prophage Related	Pseudogene, prophage Rac integration site ttcA duplication	The attachment site of Rac is a 26 bp repeat region flanking Rac: 1409923-1409948 and 1432983-1433008 (A J. Clark, pers. comm., 1998). The ends of Rac are marked at the left end of these repeat regions to delineate attB and attP. This Rac integration event is within the ttcA gene; the first 17 aa of TtcA are Rac-derived. The ttcC' pseudogene is a remnant 17 aa displaced from the original chromosomal ttcA gene. 25 bp encoding four mismatches immediately preceed the 26 bp exact repeat. Representative of both alleles are found in sequenced E. coli and Shigella genomes.	b4638
mokA'	None	pseudogene, overlapping regulatory peptide, enables hokB	Null	Pseudogene, overlapping regulatory peptide, enables hokB; first 11 aa deleted by IS150 insertion	Insertion of IS150 caused a 39 bp deletion relative to the intact hokA/mokA locus in E. coli C, removing the starts of mokA and sokA.	b4647
yibU'	None	pseudogene, H repeat-associated protein	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction, H repeat-associated protein; rhsA-linked	A frameshift at codon 28 and a stop codon at codon 24 were hypothetically reconstructed.	b4652
yibV'	None	pseudogene, putative cryptic Rhs immunity protein	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction, predicted cryptic Rhs immunity protein; antitoxin in Rhs polymorphic toxin system	YibV' is a predicted cryptic antitoxin, or immunity protein (Pfam: PF15596), against an Rhs family polymorphic toxin. YibV' has been reconstructed, correcting a frameshift to match other E. coli strain alleles by removing an A after codon 109, producing a 145 aa protein sequence.	b4615
yibW'	None	pseudogene, rhsA-linked	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction, rhsA-linked	A frameshift was hypothetically reconstructed by adding an N after codon 28; YibW' is a C-terminal fragment matching the unique C-terminal extension of the S. sonnei Rhs family protein Ss046.	b4651
yoeG'	None	pseudogene, CP4-44 putative prophage remnant	Phage or Prophage Related	Pseudogene reconstruction, CP4-44 putative defective prophage; N-terminal fragment	Transposase homolog, IS4 family, transposase family 25. Five inframe stop codons were replaced by Xs. A frameshift corrected at codon 146 is marked with an X.	b4640
yoeH'	None	pseudogene, CP4-44 putative prophage remnant	Phage or Prophage Related	Pseudogene, CP4-44 putative defective prophage; C-terminal fragment	Homologous to C-terminus of 20 family transposases, like E. coli E24377A Q27V67. Inframe stops at codons 5 and 36 are represented by Xs in the reconstructed protein sequence.	b4641
yjhY'	None	pseudogene, zinc finger protein family	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction, novel zinc finger family protein	An inframe stop codon 30 was hypothetically reconstructed as an X. Only Gram-negative family member.	b4656
ykgQ'	None	pseudogene, putative dehydrogenase	Null	Pseudogene, C-terminal fragment of a putative dehydrogenase	An intact allele is putative dehydrogenase Z0377 of E. coli O157:H7 (Q8X6G0).	b4631
ylcI	None	DUF3950 family protein, DLP12 prophage	Phage or Prophage Related	DUF3950 family protein, DLP12 prophage	YlcI belongs to the DUF3950 family (Pfam PF13132) of putative phage proteins.	b4589
yjhZ'	None	pseudogene, rimK paralog, C-terminal fragment	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction, predicted acetyltransferase	An inframe stop codon at position 44 was translated as an X for the reconstruction. An intact version of YjhZ is present in Escherichia sp. 3_2_53FAA as ESAG_039(). GNAT N-acetyltransferase family.	b4657
yicT'	erhM, rhuM(S.t.)	pseudogene	Null	Pseudogene, N-terminal fragment	Intact alleles of YicT have been called RhuM (Q1R4S5) and ErhM (Q1AP19). Orthologous to Salmonella virulence island SPI-3 gene rhuM. yicT also has small internal deletions.	b4653
ymgI	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Uncharacterized protein	ymgI and ymgJ are adjacent, divergently oriented, and similar to one another at their N- and C-termini (Hemm, 2008). It is possible that ymgI and ymgJ are not translated into proteins.	b4593
ymgJ	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Uncharacterized protein	ymgI and ymgJ are adjacent, divergently oriented, and similar to one another at their N- and C-termini (Hemm, 2008). It is possible that ymgI and ymgJ are not translated into proteins.	b4594
ykfM	None	lethality reduction protein, putative inner membrane protein	Null	Lethality reduction protein, predicted membrane protein	Mutations in ykfM have a hyperlethality phenotype when cells are stressed; YkfM is a protein that reduces the lethal effects of stress (Han, 2010). YkfM has three transmembrane helicies predicted.	b4586
yjdQ'	None	pseudogene, P4-like integrase remnant	Null	Pseudogene reconstruction, P4-like integrase remnant; C-terminal fragment	A stop codon at postion 14 and a frameshift at codon 29 were hypothetically reconstructed with Xs.	b4654
ykfN'	None	pseudogene, YdiA family	Null	Pseudogene, N-terminal remnant, YdiA family	YdiA/UPF0085 Family.	b4626
ysaC'	None	pseudogene	Null	Pseudogene, C-terminal remnant	A deletion has apparently removed the N-terminal regions of ysaC and ysaD. An intact version of this region is present in O157:H7 with three genes: a putative AraC-trpe transcriptional regulator Z5000:Q8XDK9(ysaC), a putative permease Z5001:Q8XDK7 and a putative glycosidase Z5002:Q7A9W5(ysaD). Apparently the putative glycosidase was also deleted from K-12.	b4648
ysaD'	None	pseudogene, internal sequence remnant	Null	Pseudogene, internal sequence remnant	A deletion has apparently removed the N-terminal regions of ysaC and ysaD. An intact version of this region is present in O157:H7 with three genes: a putative AraC-type transcriptional regulator Z5000:Q8XDK9(ysaC), a putative permease Z5001:Q8XDK7 and a putative glycosidase Z5002:Q7A9W5(ysaD). Apparently the putative glycosidase was also deleted from K-12. The last C-terminal residues of YsaD are also missing.	b4649
yjbT	None	putative periplasmic protein	Null	Predicted periplasmic protein, function unknown	The first 29 aa of YjbT are predicted to be a type I signal peptide. yjbT is restricted to E. coli genomes. The convergent yjbH_yjbT interval has a predicted Rho-independent bi-directional terminator.	b4620
yciZ	deoL	uncharacterized protein	Null	UPF0509 family protein	yciT(deoT) and yciZ(deoL) are co-transcribed and constitute an operon (Elgrably-Weiss, 2006). deoT stands for deoR-Type based on its homology to DeoR, and deoL stands for deoT leader peptide (Elgrably-Weiss, 2006). deo is reserved for genes involved in deoxyribose metabolism; deoT and deoL are designated as synonyms. There is no evidence that YciZ(DeoL) acts as a regulatory leader peptide. Supportive evidence for YciZ(DeoL) translation has been obtained using mass spectrometry analysis optimized for small protein detection (Muller, 2010).	b4596
ydgU	None	stationary phase-induced protein	Null	Stationary phase expressed protein, function unknown	Predicted TM segment.	b4601
ymiA	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Predicted membrane protein, function unknown	An alternate start site 12 codons upstream is now predicted because an upstream YmiA peptide was detected using shotgun proteomics (Krug, 2013). The upstream start site has a poor RBS but some additional amino acid similarity while the internal site has a better RBS. YmiA has one predicted transmembrane helix, residues 31-53.	b4522
ythA	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Expressed protein, function unknown	Predicted TM segment.	b4655
uof	None	ryhB-regulated fur leader peptide	Null	RyhB-regulated Fur regulatory leader peptide	The ryhB sRNA is an antisense regulator of uof translation, which is coupled to the downstream fur gene translation; the fur RBS is occluded by 5' mRNA secondary structure, which is opened by uof translation (Vecerek, 2007). A ribosome binding toeprint to the uof translation initiation region was demonstrated, although uof does not have a canonical RBS (Vecerek, 2007).	b4637
safA	yneN	two-component system connector membrane protein, EvgSA to PhoQP	Regulator; Global regulatory functions	Two-component system connector protein, EvgSA to PhoQP; TCS regulon connector; EvgSA-regulated membrane protein that activates the PhoQP regulon	yneN(b1500) has been renamed as safA for "sensor associating factor" (Itoh, 2009). A safA(b1500) mutant has 3-fold lower acid resistance and is regulated by EvgA as the first gene in the safA(b1500)-ydeO operon (Masuda, 2002). safA(b1500) is activated by EvgA to stimulate genes downstream of PhoP in a PhoP-dependent manner by binding to PhoQ in the membrane (Eguchi, 2007). SafA has a single predicted central transmembrane helix.	b1500
sgrT	None	inhibitor of glucose uptake	Null	Inhibitor of glucose uptake	SgrT is encoded within the sgrS sRNA and translated during glucose-phosphate stress; overproduction prevents inducer exclusion and inhibits glucose uptake, probably by interfering with PtsG activity (Wadler, 2007).	b4662
azuC	IS092, isrB	acid-inducible small membrane-associated protein	Null	Acid-inducible small membrane-associated protein	The azuC mRNA was previously identified as sRNA IS092(isrB) (Chen, 2002). azuC gene name and identification, J. Miranda-Rios, personal communication (Hemm, 2008).	b4663
ibsD	None	toxic membrane protein	Null	Toxic membrane protein, in SIBd repeat	sibD sRNA is an antisense regulator of IbsD (Fozo, 2008). IbsC, and probably all Ibs proteins, depolarize membranes (Fozo, 2008).	b4664
ibsC	None	toxic membrane protein	Null	Toxic membrane protein, in SIBc repeat	sibC sRNA is an antisense regulator of IbsC (Fozo, 2008). IbsC, and probably all Ibs proteins, depolarize membranes (Fozo, 2008).	b4665
ibsE	None	toxic membrane protein	Null	Toxic membrane protein, in SIBe repeat	sibE sRNA is an antisense regulator of IbsE (Fozo, 2008). IbsC, and probably all Ibs proteins, depolarize membranes (Fozo, 2008).	b4666
ibsA	None	toxic membrane protein	Null	Toxic membrane protein, in SIBa repeat	sibA sRNA is an antisense regulator of IbsA (Fozo, 2008). IbsC, and probably all Ibs proteins, depolarize membranes (Fozo, 2008).	b4667
ibsB	None	toxic membrane protein	Null	Toxic membrane protein, in SIBb repeat	sibB sRNA is an antisense regulator of IbsB (Fozo, 2008). IbsC, and probably all Ibs proteins, depolarize membranes (Fozo, 2008).	b4668
ilvX	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Expressed protein, function unknown	Null	b4669
yjeV	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Expressed protein, function unknown	Null	b4670
ykgR	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Expressed protein, function unknown	Predicted TM segment.	b4671
ymiB	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Expressed protein, function unknown	Null	b4672
ymjD'	None	pseudogene fragment, MhpC family	Null	Expressed deletion pseudogene fusion remnant protein	An internal 290 codons of ymjD' has apparently been deleted (represented by an X at position 19 of the reconstructed remnant protein sequence) leaving codons 1-18 fused in frame to codons 309-310; an intact 310 aa allele is in E. coli strain E24377A (NCBI: 157081112) personal communication, Eric Neeno-Eckwall (11/08). Apparently, YmjD' is an expressed pseudogene remnant (Hemm, 2008).	b4673
ynbG	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Expressed protein, function unknown	Null	b4674
yoaJ	None	inner membrane-associated protein	Null	Expressed protein, membrane-associated, function unknown	Predicted TM segment.	b4675
yoaK	None	inner membrane-associated protein	Null	Expressed protein, membrane-associated, function unknown	Predicted TM segment.	b4676
yobI	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Expressed protein, function unknown	Null	b4677
yoeI	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Expressed protein, function unknown	Null	b4678
yohP	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Expressed protein, membrane-associated, function unknown	Predicted TM segment.	b4679
ypdK	None	inner membrane protein	Null	Highly expressed membrane protein, function unknown	YpdK is a highly expressed membrane protein (Hemm, 2008).	b4680
yqcG	None	membrane stress resistance protein	Null	Membrane stress resistance protein	YqcG is expressed during exponential phase growth (Hemm, 2008). YqcG is needed for full resistance to cell membrane stress (Hobbs, 2010).	b4682
yqeL	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Expressed protein, function unknown	Null	b4683
yqfG	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Expressed protein, function unknown	Predicted TM segment.	b4684
yrbN	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Expressed protein, function unknown	Null	b4685
yshB	None	uncharacterized protein	Null	Expressed protein, function unknown	Predicted TM segment.	b4686
ykgS'	None	pseudogene	Null	Pseudogene internal fragment; CP4-6 putative prophage remnant	Upstream of argF, at the insertion point of IS1C, ykgR' is a pseudogene copy of amino acids 300-367 of YfjI, a protein of unknown function in the CP4-57 prophage.	b4688
rzoQ	Rz1	putative Rz1-like lipoprotein, Qin prophage	Null	Probable Rz1-like lipoprotein, Qin prophage	The first 22 aa of RzoQ are predicted to be a type II signal peptide. rzoQ is a newly predicted lipoprotein gene nested within the renamed rzpQ(ydfP) gene, based on homology to the Rz-ilke and Rz1-like proteins in the Salmonella (serotype-converting) bacteriophage epsilon15 genome (Kropinski, 2007; Summer, 2007).	b4689
shoB	ryfB, yphI	toxic membrane protein	Null	Toxic membrane protein antisense regulated by ohsC	The shoB mRNA is the now defunct RyfB sRNA.	b4687
oweE'	None	pseudogene, lambda replication protein O homolog; CPS-53/KpLE1 prophage	Phage or Prophage Related	Pseudogene, lambda replication protein O homolog; e14 prophage	Over-expression of the cloned oweE'-aaaE'(ymfN) fusion protein encoded in the e14 prophage induces filamentation (Burke, 2013). Full length oweE is represented by 313 aa lambda replication protein O homolog c3192 of E. coli CFT073 (NCBI: 26109441). oweS' in the CPS-53 prophage matches the C-terminal 235 aa of intact O protein c3192 and oweE' matches the N-terminal 78 aa of c3192 such that a hypothetical oweE'-oweS' protein fusion would create an intact O-type replication protein almost identical to c3192, indicating that the deletion of the e14 replication/lysis middle region may have contributed genetic material to CPS-53.	b4692
ykgT'	yagP	pseudogene, MobA-related	Null	Pseudogene, MobA/GlmU-related, fragment	YkgT' was previously the N-terminus of an hybrid fusion protein with YagP. An intact E. coli allele has not yet been found but a full length intact 187 aa homolog ERIG_00426 is found in Escherichia fergusonii B253. YkgT' belongs to COG2068, which has an unassigned function; it appears to have evolved an N-terminal GlmU-like homology (COG1207) and kept the C-terminal mostly MobA-derived COG0746. YgfJ is an intact COG2068 paralog to YkgT. The presence of overlapping pseudogenes split from a fusion gene like yagP' and ykgT' indicate a region of identity in the overlapping HK codons; the recombination fusion event happened in the 2 codon interval shared by the two adjacent pseudogenes. The deletion that formed these two pseudogenes created a fusion gene that may be expressed.	b4695
yrdF'	None	pseudogene, conserved protein	Null	Pseudogene, N-terminal fragment	An intact version of the 276 aa YrdF is present in several E. coli strains, e.g. HS (UniProtKB:A8A563). YrdF is belongs to the COG4848/DUF1444/UPF0354/PF07285 family of proteins of unknown function.	b4697
mgtL	None	regulatory leader peptide for mgtA	Null	Regulatory leader peptide for mgtA	The mgtA gene is regulated by a riboswitch responding to Mg(2+) and the MgtL leader peptide responding to intracellular proline levels (Park, 2010).	b4702
pmrR	None	putative membrane-bound BasS regulator	Null	Probable regulator of BasS activity, membrane protein	PmrR has been characterized as a Salmonella membrane protein, conserved in E. coli, that binds to Salmonella PmrB(BasS) and modulates its sensor kinase activity; Salmonella pmrR is transcriptionally regulated by PmrA(BasR) which binds the PmrR promoter (unpublished results of Kato et al. cited in Alix, 2009). PmrR has not been characterized in E. coli and may be a BasS(PmrB) modulator in E. coli.	b4703
mntS	rybA	Mn(2)-response protein, MntR-repressed	Null	MntR-repressed Mn(2)-response protein; MntS overexpression causes Mn(2)-sensitivity	MntS is required for full repression of mntH by MntR and may function by making Mn(2) more available to cells, possibly acting as a manganese chaperone (Waters, 2011). The mntS mRNA was previously thought to be an sRNA (Waters, 2011). The previously annotated yliL(b0816,EG14410) gene partially overlapping mntS is neither conserved nor expressed so it has been removed as a gene (Waters, 2011).	b4705
iroK	None	3-hydroxypropionic acid resistance peptide	Null	3-hydroxypropionic acid resistance peptide	The last 21 amino acids of the hcaR gene has been proposed to be a separate IroK protein whose gene is nested in hcaR that when expressed increases resistance to 3-hydroxypropionic acid independent of HcaT-mediated transport; an apparent RBS in front of iroK is inferred to initiate translation from a clone and when the starting ATG is mutated to TTG the resistance phenotype goes away, however expression of a peptide from the chromosomal iroK locus was not demonstrated (Warnecke, 2011).	b4706
oriC	None	Null	Null	Origin of chromosomal DNA replication, bidirectional	Null	b4489
dctA	out(S.t.)	C4-dicarboxylic acid, orotate and citrate transporter	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	C4-dicarboxylic acid, orotate and citrate transporter; 3-fluoromalate resistance, D-tartrate resistant; uptake of D-malate	Null	b3528
dgoD	yidU	D-galactonate dehydratase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	D-galactonate dehydratase	A genome sequence error, now repaired, previously fused dgoA and dgoD. A corrected DNA sequence, Babbitt et al., 1995 (Genbank U19577), has an incorrect translation (wrong strand).	b4478
glcB	glc	malate synthase G	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Glyoxylate bypass	Malate synthase G	Null	b2976
gpsA	None	glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (NAD+)	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Aerobic respiration	sn-Glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase [NAD(P)+]	Null	b3608
hpt	None	hypoxanthine phosphoribosyltransferase	Enzyme; Salvage of nucleosides and nucleotides	Hypoxanthine phosphoribosyltransferase	Hpt also utilzes guanine as a weak substrate.	b0125
kefB	trkB	potassium:proton antiporter	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Cations	NEM-activatable K+/H+ antiporter	Null	b3350
nanT	None	sialic acid transporter	Transport; Murein sacculus, peptidoglycan	Sialic acid transporter	Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS).	b3224
nfsB	dprA, nfnB, nfsI(S.t.), ntr	dihydropteridine reductase, NAD(P)H-dependent, oxygen-insensitive	Enzyme; Drug/analog sensitivity	Nitroreductase B, oxygen-insensitive, NAD(P)H, FMN-dependent; minor; reduces a variety of nitroaromatics, e.g. dihydropteridine, nitrofurantoin, nitrofurazone, quinones; monomeric or homodimeric	nfsB is in the MprA regulon (Marbach, 2012). nfsA, nfsB, rutE, and ydjA are paralogs.	b0578
pta	None	phosphate acetyltransferase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Phosphate acetyltransferase, produces acetyl phosphate; creBC regulon; alkali-inducible; binds Zn(II)	HT_Cmplx21_Cyt: GlmU+Pta.	b2297
shiA	yeeM	shikimate transporter	Putative transport; Not classified	Shikimate and dehydroshikimate permease	Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS). A second transport system for shikimate has not yet been mapped (Brown, 1976; Knop, 2001).	b1981
thiL	None	thiamine monophosphate kinase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Thiamine	Thiamine monophosphate kinase, involved in thiamine salvage	2/12 ThiL peptide masses from MS analysis confirm this start codon and indicate that the initial Met is removed (Maillet, 2007). ThiL peptide masses from MS/MS analysis indicate this is the correct start site and that the initial Met is removed (Guo, 2014). otherPDB (S. typhimurium): 1VQV.	b0417
uxuB	None	D-mannonate oxidoreductase, NAD-dependent	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	D-mannonate oxidoreductase, NAD-dependent; glucuronate branch of hexuronate pathway	UxuR regulon. MtlD, UxaB, UxuB, YdfI and YeiQ are all COG0246/PF01232 members encoding mannitol/altrunate-related sugar oxidoreductases. UxuB, YdfI and YeiQ are all part of the UxuB sub-family of mannonate oxidoreductases.	b4323
uxuR	None	fructuronate-inducible hexuronate regulon transcriptional repressor; autorepressor	Regulator; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Repressor for UxuR regulon; true inducer is fructuronate	UxuR regulon. Glucuronate induction of UxuR regulon via its conversion to fructuronate. UxuR is a GntR-type DNA-binding transcriptional regulator.	b4324
xapA	pndA	purine nucleoside phosphorylase 2; nicotinamide 1-beta-D-riboside synthase	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Nucleotide interconversions	Xanthosine phosphorylase; purine nucleoside phosphorylase 2, PNP-II; inosine-guanosine phosphorylase; nicotinamide salvage enzyme nicotinamide 1-beta-D-riboside synthase; hexameric	XapA has nicotinamide 1-beta-D-riboside synthase activity, while the reverse reaction (1-beta-D-riboside phosphorolysis) is catalyzed by purine nucleoside phosphorylase 1 (DeoD); an intact xapA gene enables a pncA nadC mutant to utilize exogenous nicotinamide (Dong, 2014).	b2407
xylF	xylT	D-xylose transporter subunit	Transport; Transport of small molecules: Carbohydrates, organic acids, alcohols	Periplasmic xylose-binding protein, transport system	Null	b3566
xylR	None	xylose divergent operon transcriptional activator	Putative regulator; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Transcriptional activator for the xylAB-xylFGHR divergent operons; AraC family	Null	b3569
sapA	None	antimicrobial peptide transport ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein	Putative transport; Not classified	Antimicrobial peptide ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein	Characterized initially in Salmonella. The proposal that the sap operon transports peptides (Groisman, 1992) has been challenged (Stumpe, 1997; Harms, 2001). The first 21 aa of SapA are predicted to be a Type I signal peptide. A deletion mutant of Salmonella sapA was not as protamine-sensitive as sapD mutants (Parra-Lopez, 1993).	b1294
sapB	None	antimicrobial peptide transport ABC transporter permease	Putative transport; Not classified	Antimicrobial peptide ABC transporter permease	Characterized initially in Salmonella. The proposal that the sap operon transports peptides (Groisman, 1992) has been challenged (Stumpe, 1997; Harms, 2001).	b1293
sapC	None	antimicrobial peptide transport ABC transporter permease	Putative transport; Not classified	Antimicrobial peptide ABC transporter permease	Characterized initially in Salmonella. The proposal that the sap operon transports peptides (Groisman, 1992) has been challenged (Stumpe, 1997; Harms, 2001).	b1292
nrdE	None	ribonucleoside-diphosphate reductase 2, alpha subunit	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Nucleotide interconversions	Ribonucleoside-diphosphate reductase 2, alpha subunit; class Ib aerobic ribonucleotide reductase	Fur regulon. RpoS regulon.	b2675
mokB	None	regulatory peptide	Null	Overlapping regulatory peptide, enables hokB expression	MokB translation enables HokB translation when MokB is not inhibited by the sokB sRNA.	b1420
flgA	flaU	assembly protein for flagellar basal-body periplasmic P ring	Putative structure; Surface structures	Flagellar basal body P-ring formation	Flagellar regulon. The first 21 aa of FlgA are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b1072
flgH	flaY	flagellar protein of basal-body outer-membrane L ring	Structural component; Surface structures	Flagellar synthesis, basal body L-ring lipoprotein	Flagellar regulon. The first 21 aa of FlgH are a type II signal peptide.	b1079
flgI	flaM	putative flagellar basal body protein	Putative structural component; Surface structures	Basal body P-ring flagellar protein	Overexpression causes a decrease in the amount of biofilm formed. Flagellar regulon. The first 19 aa of FlgI are predicted to be a type I signal peptide.	b1080
fliI	flaC	flagellum-specific ATP synthase	Enzyme; Surface structures	Cytoplasmic membrane ATPase involved in flagellar assembly; involved in export of flagellar axial protein subunits	Characterized primarily in Salmonella	b1941
fliJ	flaO	flagellar protein	Structural component; Surface structures	Flagellin export apparatus soluble chaperone	Null	b1942
fliK	flaE	flagellar hook-length control protein	Structural component; Surface structures	Hook filament junction; controls hook length	Null	b1943
mhpA	None	3-(3-hydroxyphenyl)propionate hydroxylase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	3-(3-Hydroxyphenyl)propionate 2-hydroxylase; utilizes MHP	ubiI(visC), ubiH, ubiF and mhpA are paralogs.	b0347
mhpB	None	2,3-dihydroxyphenylpropionate 1,2-dioxygenase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	3-(2,3-Dihydroxyphenyl)propionate dioxygenase; utilizes MHP	Null	b0348
mhpC	None	2-hydroxy-6-ketonona-2,4-dienedioic acid hydrolase	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Carbon compounds	Dihydroxyphenylpropionate-ring-fission-product hydrolase; 2-hydroxy-6-ketonona-2,4-dienedioic acid hydrolase; utilizes MHP	Null	b0349
mhpR	None	mhp operon transcriptional activator	Regulator; Not classified	Transcriptional activator, mhp operon; utilizes MHP	Null	b0346
rusA	rus, ybcP	DLP12 prophage; endonuclease RUS	Enzyme; Degradation of DNA; Phage or Prophage Related	Endonuclease, Holliday structure resolvase, DLP12 prophage	Null	b0550
alaT	talA	Null	Null	Alanine tRNA(UGC) 1B	In rrnA operon.	b3853
alaU	talD	Null	Null	Alanine tRNA(UGC) 1B	In rrnD operon.	b3276
alaV	None	Null	Null	Alanine tRNA(UGC) 1B	In rrnH operon.	b0203
alaW	alaWalpha	Null	Null	Alanine tRNA(GGC) 2; tandemly duplicated	Null	b2397
alaX	alaWbeta	Null	Null	Alanine tRNA(GGC) 2; tandemly duplicated alaW	Null	b2396
argQ	argVdelta	Null	Null	Arginine tRNA(ACG) 2; tandem quadruplicate genes	Null	b2691
argU	dnaY, fimU(S.t.), pin	Null	Null	Arginine tRNA(UCU) 4	argU10(Ts) inhibits DNA replication at high temperatures and causes the Pin phenotype at a permissive temperature. argU is the attachment site of the DLP12 prophage. A 47 bp duplication, the last 45 bp of argU plus 2 distal bp, flanks DLP12 and creates the 45 bp pauD' tRNA pseudogene, which is considered part of the defective DLP12 prophage.	b0536
argV	argValpha	Null	Null	Arginine tRNA(ACG) 2; tandem quadruplicate genes	Null	b2694
argW	None	Null	Null	Arginine tRNA(CCU) 5	The last 15 nt of argU, plus 1 bp, is the 16 bp attL attachment site for the CPS-53/KpLE1 prophage.	b2348
argX	None	Null	Null	Arginine tRNA(CCG) 3	The argX-hisR-leuT-proM tRNA operon is under stringent control and has been called the argT operon (Rowley, 1993).	b3796
argY	argVbeta	Null	Null	Arginine tRNA(ACG) 2; tandem quadruplicate genes	Null	b2693
argZ	argVgamma	Null	Null	Arginine tRNA(ACG) 2; tandem quadruplicate genes	Null	b2692
asnT	None	Null	Null	Asparagine tRNA(GUU)	Null	b1977
asnU	None	Null	Null	Asparagine tRNA(GUU)	Null	b1986
asnV	None	Null	Null	Asparagine tRNA(GUU)	Null	b1989
aspT	tasC	Null	Null	Aspartate tRNA(GUC) 1 triplicated gene	Null	b3760
aspU	None	Null	Null	Aspartate tRNA(GUC) 1 triplicated gene	In rrnH operon.	b0206
aspV	None	Null	Null	Aspartate tRNA(GUC) 1 triplicated gene	Null	b0216
cysT	None	Null	Null	Cysteine tRNA(GCA)	Null	b1910
ffs	None	Null	Null	4.5S sRNA component of Signal Recognition Particle (SRP); works with the Ffh protein; involved in co-translational protein translocation into and possibly through membranes	pre-4.5s RNA is 138 nt, starting at -24. 	b0455
glnU	glnUalpha, supB	Null	Null	Glutamine tRNA(UUG) 1	A putative small 39 aa protein designated b0669, MNRLLEEDGWGTWIRTRECRYQKPVPYRLAIPHPYNAFW, was originally annotated as complementary to glnU; b0669 was later eliminated from the genome annotations as being an unlikely gene product with no evidence of protein conservation. However an RNA transcript complementary to glnU detectable only in an RNase P deficient strain was found using microarrays and confirmed with a Northern blot (Li, 2003). The nature, length, and start site of this b0669 transcript is not known: it may be a novel sRNA, it may encode a small protein, it may be a ubiF readthrough transcript, or it might represent a spurious non-physiological transcription event due to the rpesence of an accidental promoter.	b0670
glnV	glnValpha, Su2, suII, supE	Null	Null	Glutamine tRNA(CUG) 2	Null	b0665
glnW	glnUbeta	Null	Null	Glutamine tRNA(UUG) 1	Null	b0668
glnX	glnVbeta, supE	Null	Null	Glutamine tRNA(CUG) 2	Null	b0664
gltT	tgtB	Null	Null	Glutamate tRNA(UUC) 2	Null	b3969
gltU	tgtC	Null	Null	Glutamate tRNA(UUC) 2	Null	b3757
gltV	tgtE	Null	Null	Glutamate tRNA(UUC) 2	Null	b4008
gltW	None	Null	Null	Glutamate tRNA(UUC) 2	Null	b2590
glyT	sumA, sup15B, supA36	Null	Null	Glycine tRNA(UCC) 2, UGA suppression	Null	b3978
glyU	suA36, sufD, sumB, supT	Null	Null	Glycine tRNA(CCC) 1	glyU is a backbone gene flanking the insertion of the type three secretion system pathogenicity island ETT2. 18 kb of ETT2 has been deleted from K-12, leaving a 10 kb remnant.	b2864
glyV	glyValpha, ins, suA58, suA78	Null	Null	Glycine tRNA(GCC) 3	Null	b4163
glyW	ins, mutC, suA58, suA78	Null	Null	Glycine tRNA(GCC) 3	Null	b1911
glyX	glyVbeta, mutA	Null	Null	Glycine tRNA(GCC) 3	Null	b4164
glyY	glyVgamma	Null	Null	Glycine tRNA(GCC) 3	Null	b4165
hisR	None	Null	Null	Histidine tRNA(GUG)	Null	b3797
ileT	tilA	Null	Null	Isoleucine tRNA(GAU) 1, triplicate	Null	b3852
ileU	tilD	Null	Null	Isoleucine tRNA(GAU) 1, triplicate	Null	b3277
ileV	None	Null	Null	Isoleucine tRNA(GAU) 1, triplicate	Null	b0202
ileX	None	Null	Null	Isoleucine tRNA(CAU) 2	Null	b3069
leuP	leuVbeta	Null	Null	Leucine tRNA(CAG) 1; tandemly triplicate leuVPQ, duplicate with leuT	Null	b4369
leuQ	leuVgamma	Null	Null	Leucine tRNA(CAG) 1; tandemly triplicate, and duplicate with leuT	Null	b4370
leuT	None	Null	Null	Leucine tRNA(CAG) 1, duplicate with leuVPQ	Null	b3798
leuU	None	Null	Null	Leucine tRNA(UAG) 2	Null	b3174
leuV	leuValpha	Null	Null	Leucine tRNA(CAG) 1, tandemly triplicate leuVPQ, duplicate with leuT	Null	b4368
leuW	feeB	Null	Null	Leucine tRNA(CAA) 3; anticodon has cmo(5)U	Null	b0672
leuX	Su-6, supP	Null	Null	Leucine tRNA(UAA) 5	A double mutation of the leuX anticodon CAA to CUA creates an amber [UAG] suppressor (Yoshimura, 1984). The intB' pseudogene is adjacent to the leuX tRNA gene and may be the remnant of P2-like phage integration at leuX and subsequent loss. The region from leuX to yjhQ gene was once designated as prophage KpLE2 (Hayashi, 2001). Although this region contains several IS elements, it has no other phage gene homologs and has many core genes, and thus is unlikely to represent a prophage region; therefore all references to the KpLE2 prophage have been removed. The region clockwise from leuX through intB' has been designated as the PR-X prophage remnant and described as P2-like and highly deleted, although no length or right end was indicated (Casjens, 2003). PR-X has not been annotated as a defective prophage because it appears to be limited to one pseudogene, intB' and the leuX-intB' intergenic region.	b4270
leuZ	None	Null	Null	Leucine tRNA(GAG) 4	Null	b1909
lysT	lysTalpha, sua, supG, supL	Null	Null	Lysine tRNA(UUU)	Null	b0743
lysV	supN	Null	Null	Lysine tRNA(UUU)	Null	b2404
lysW	lysTbeta, su	Null	Null	Lysine tRNA(UUU)	Null	b0745
metT	metTalpha	Null	Null	Methionine tRNA(CAU) m; duplicate gene	Null	b0673
metU	metTbeta	Null	Null	Methionine tRNA(CAU) m; duplicate gene	Null	b0666
metV	metX, metZbeta	Null	Null	Initiator methionine tRNA(CAU) f1; triplicate gene	Null	b2816
metY	None	Null	Null	Initiator methionine tRNA(CAU) f2	Null	b3171
metZ	metZalpha	Null	Null	Initiator methionine tRNA(CAU) f1; triplicate gene	Null	b2814
micF	IS113, stc	Null	Null	Regulatory antisense sRNA affecting ompF expression; member of soxRS regulon	The divergent ompC-micF operon promoter region binds ArcA and ArcA activates micF and ompC expression (Federowicz, 2014).	b4439
pheU	pheR, pheW	Null	Null	Phenylalanine tRNA(GAA)	Null	b4134
pheV	pheC	Null	Null	Phenylalanine tRNA(GAA)	Null	b2967
proK	proV	Null	Null	Proline tRNA(CGG) 1	Null	b3545
proL	proW	Null	Null	Proline tRNA(GGG) 2	Null	b2189
proM	proU	Null	Null	Proline tRNA(UGG) 3	Null	b3799
rnpB	None	Null	Null	RNase P, M1 RNA enzyme component; involved in transfer RNA and 4.5S RNA-processing	Has leadzyme properties.	b3123
rrfA	None	Null	Null	5S rRNA of rrnA operon	Null	b3855
rrfB	None	Null	Null	5S rRNA of rrnB operon	Null	b3971
rrfC	None	Null	Null	5S rRNA of rrnC operon	Null	b3759
rrfD	None	Null	Null	5S rRNA of rrnD operon	Null	b3274
rrfE	None	Null	Null	5S rRNA of rrnE operon	Null	b4010
rrfG	None	Null	Null	5S rRNA of rrnG operon	Null	b2588
rrfH	None	Null	Null	5S rRNA of rrnH operon	Null	b0205
rrlA	None	Null	Null	23S rRNA of rrnA operon	Null	b3854
rrlB	None	Null	Null	23S rRNA of rrnB operon	Null	b3970
rrlC	None	Null	Null	23S rRNA of rrnC operon	Null	b3758
rrlD	None	Null	Null	23S rRNA of rrnD operon	Null	b3275
rrlE	None	Null	Null	23S rRNA of rrnE operon	Null	b4009
rrlG	None	Null	Null	23S rRNA of rrnG operon	Null	b2589
rrlH	None	Null	Null	23S rRNA of rrnH operon	Null	b0204
rrsA	None	Null	Null	16S rRNA of rrnA operon	Null	b3851
rrsB	None	Null	Null	16S rRNA of rrnB operon	Null	b3968
rrsC	None	Null	Null	16S rRNA of rrnC operon	Null	b3756
rrsD	None	Null	Null	16S rRNA of rrnD operon	Null	b3278
rrsE	None	Null	Null	16S rRNA of rrnE operon	Null	b4007
rrsG	None	Null	Null	16S rRNA of rrnG operon	Null	b2591
rrsH	None	Null	Null	16S rRNA of rrnH operon	Null	b0201
rrfF	rrfDbeta, rrvD	Null	Null	5S rRNA of rrnD operon	Null	b3272
selC	fdhC	Null	Null	Selenocysteyl tRNA(UCA) (converted from serine tRNA)	Null	b3658
serT	divE	Null	Null	Serine tRNA(UGA) 1	Null	b0971
serU	ftsM, Su-1, su1, supD, supH	Null	Null	Serine tRNA(CGA) 2	Null	b1975
serV	supD	Null	Null	Serine tRNA(GCU) 3	Null	b2695
serW	None	Null	Null	Serine tRNA(GGA) 5	The infA and serW promoter regions bind ArcA and serW expression is activated by ArcA (Federowicz, 2014).	b0883
serX	None	Null	Null	Serine tRNA(GGA) 5	Null	b1032
spf	IS197	Null	Null	Spot 42 sRNA; antisense regulator of galK translation	Null	b3864
ssrS	ssr, ssrI	Null	Null	6S sRNA inhibits RNA polymerase promoter binding; template for RNA-directed pRNA synthesis by RNAP; mimics an open promoter	ssrS is a non-essential gene. Deficiency and overproduction of 6S RNA (SsrS) both compromise long-term survival. SsrS is a template for pRNA synthesis, releasing itself from RNAP by pRNA synthesis, relieving repression; the pRNA is 14 nt to 20 nt (AUCGGCUCAGGGGACUGGCC), initiating at U4 of SsrS (Wassarman, 2006).	b2911
ssrA	sipB	Null	Null	tmRNA, 10Sa RNA; acts as tRNA-Ala and mRNA template for tagging proteins resulting from premature transcription termination for degradation, a process known as trans-translation	The tRNA mimetic part of tmRNA has two modifications analogous to tRNA modifications including m(5)U341, which is analagous to m(5)U54 in tRNAs modified by TrmA(RUMT); and pseudouridine(342), which is analagous to pseudouridine(55) in tRNAs modified by TruB; the minor modification (~5%) at U347 is not analagous to any tRNA modification and may not be physiologically significant (Feldon, 1998). A trmA mutant lacks the m(5)U341 modification in tmRNA (Ranaei-Siadat, 2013). arfB(yaeJ) is a multicopy suppressor of the synthetic lethality of ssrA and arfA (Chadani, 2011a). tmRNA binds non-specifically to some DNA-binding proteins, modulating their activity. ssrA suppresses prs(ts) mutations. otherPDB (A. aeolicus): 1P6V. otherPDB (T. thermophilus): 2OB7.	b2621
thrT	None	Null	Null	Threonine tRNA(GGU) 3	Null	b3979
thrU	None	Null	Null	Threonine tRNA(UGU) 4	Null	b3976
thrV	None	Null	Null	Threonine tRNA(GGU) 1 in rrnD	Null	b3273
thrW	None	Null	Null	Threonine tRNA(CGU) 2	thrW is the attachment site of the CP4-6 prophage. A 60 bp duplication, the last 49 bp of thrW plus 11 distal bp, flanks CP4-6 and creates the 49 bp ptwF' tRNA pseudogene, which is considered part of the CP4-6 prophage.	b0244
trpT	su7, su8, su9, supU, supV	Null	Null	Tryptophan tRNA(CCA)	Null	b3761
tyrT	su(c), Su-3, Su-4, suIII, supC, supFsupO, tyrTalpha	Null	Null	Tyrosine tRNA(GUA) 1; tandemly duplicated	Null	b1231
tyrU	supM, supZ	Null	Null	Tyrosine tRNA(GUA) 2	Null	b3977
tyrV	tyrTbeta	Null	Null	Tyrosine tRNA(GUA) 1; tandemly duplicated	Null	b1230
valT	None	Null	Null	Valine tRNA(UAC) 1; duplicate gene with triplicated valUXY	Null	b0744
valU	valUalpha	Null	Null	Valine tRNA(UAC) 1; tandemly triplicate	Null	b2401
valV	None	Null	Null	Valine tRNA(GAC) 2B	Null	b1665
valW	None	Null	Null	Valine tRNA(GAC) 2A	Null	b1666
valX	valUbeta	Null	Null	Valine tRNA(UAC) 1; tandemly triplicate	Null	b2402
valY	valUgamma	Null	Null	Valine tRNA(UAC) 1; tandemly triplicate	Null	b2403
dicF	None	Null	Null	DicF antisense sRNA, inhibits ftsZ, Qin prophage	Null	b1574
oxyS	None	Null	Null	OxyS sRNA activates genes that detoxify oxidative damage	Null	b4458
metW	None	Null	Null	Initiator methionine tRNA(CAU) f1; triplicate gene	Null	b2815
dsrA	IS095	Null	Null	Regulatory sRNA enhances translation of rpoS; component of acid resistance regulatory circuit; also antagonist of H-NS function by decreasing H-NS levels	Null	b1954
csrB	None	Null	Null	CsrA-binding sRNA, antagonizing CsrA regulation; blocks the CsrA binding of glgC mRNA	Null	b4408
asnW	None	Null	Null	Asparagine tRNA(GUU)	Null	b1984
ileY	None	Null	Null	Isoleucine tRNA(GAU) 2 variant	Null	b2652
lysQ	None	Null	Null	Lysine tRNA(UUU)	Null	b0749
lysY	None	Null	Null	Lysine tRNA(UUU)	Null	b0747
lysZ	None	Null	Null	Lysine tRNA(UUU)	Null	b0748
valZ	None	Null	Null	Valine tRNA(UAC) 1	Null	b0746
sokB	None	Null	Null	Antisense sRNA blocking mokB, and hence hokB, translation	5' end mapped by primer extension (Pedersen, 1999); 5' and 3' ends mapped by RACE (Kawano, 2005). Northerns performed (Pedersen, 1999; Kawano, 2005). sokB transcripts ore more abundant in minimal medium and in stationary phase than exponential (Kawano, 2005).	b4429
sokC	sof	Null	Null	Antisense sRNA blocking mokC, and hence hokC, translation	5' end mapped by primer extension (Pedersen, 1999); 5' and 3' ends mapped by RACE (Kawano, 2005). Northerns performed (Pedersen, 1999; Kawano, 2005). sokB transcripts ore more abundant in minimal medium and in stationary phase than exponential (Kawano, 2005). IS186A interrupts the hokC transcript downstream of the hokC gene in K-12.	b4413
gcvB	IS145, psrA11	Null	Null	GcvB sRNA gene divergent from gcvA; represses oppA, dppA, gltI and livJ expression; regulated by gcvA and gcvR; this is gcvB-L, terminated at T2, 90% of gcvB RNA is from gcvB-S, encoding a 134 nt RNA terminating at T1	The t2-specific region is evolutionarily conserved and likely to be functional.	b4443
rprA	IS083, psrA5	Null	Null	Positive regulatory antisense sRNA for rpoS translation	Null	b4431
rttR	rtT, rtV1	Null	Null	rtT sRNA, processed from tyrT transcript; encodes putative Tpr protein; RNA itself may modulate the stringent response	Null	b4425
ryhB	IS176, psrA18, sraI	Null	Null	Regulatory sRNA mediating positive Fur regulon response; requires Hfq for function; global iron regulator; degraded by RNase E when bound to target	Fur represses this inhibitory RNA, relieving sdhABCD, sodB, bfr, and fumA from ryhB-mediated repression. Fusion thought to be for neighboring gene yhhX was really 5 nt down from the ryhB start of transcription, thus showing the Fur regulation of ryhB, not yhhX.	b4451
csrC	IS198, psrA21, ryiB, sraK, tpk2	Null	Null	CsrC sRNA sequesters CsrA, a carbon flux regulator; also affects biofilms and motilty	The 3' end of CsrC is not precisely mapped.	b4457
tff	t44	Null	Null	Novel sRNA, function unknown	Null	b4414
rybB	p25	Null	Null	sRNA effector of ompC and ompW mRNA instability; requires Hfq	Deletion of rybB increases ompC mRNA 3-4 fold during transition from exponential to stationary phase (Johansen, 2006). RpoE regulon. 	b4417
psrD	pke20, psrA4, sraB	Null	Null	Novel sRNA, function unknown	Null	b4418
rdlA	None	Null	Null	Antisense sRNA RdlA affects LdrA translation; proposed addiction module in LDR-A repeat, with toxic peptide LdrA	Intact rdl cDNA clones were sequenced, confirming the 5' ends and experimentally establishing the 3' ends (Kawano, 2005).	b4420
rdlB	None	Null	Null	Antisense sRNA RdlB affects LdrB translation; proposed addiction module in LDR-B repeat, with toxic peptide LdrB	Intact rdl cDNA clones were sequenced, confirming the 5' ends and experimentally establishing the 3' ends (Kawano, 2005).	b4422
rdlC	None	Null	Null	Antisense sRNA RdlC affects LdrC translation; proposed addiction module in LDR-C repeat, with toxic peptide LdrC	Intact rdl cDNA clones were sequenced, confirming the 5' ends and experimentally establishing the 3' ends (Kawano, 2005).	b4424
rdlD	None	Null	Null	Antisense sRNA RdlD affects LdrD translation; proposed addiction module in LDR-D repeat, with toxic peptide LdrD	Intact rdl cDNA clones were sequenced, confirming the 5' ends and experimentally establishing the 3' ends (Kawano, 2005).	b4454
mcaS	IS061, isrA	Null	Null	Motility and biofilm regulator	High levels of the McaS sRNA repress csgD, activate flhD and regulate pgaA, leading to increased biofilm formation (Jørgensen, 2012; Thomason, 2012).	b4426
micC	IS063, tke8	Null	Null	MicC sRNA regulator of OmpC translation	Null	b4427
rydB	IS082, tpe7	Null	Null	Novel sRNA, function unknown	Null	b4430
ryeA	IS091, psrA8, sraC, tpke79	Null	Null	Novel sRNA, function unknown	ryeA is less conserved that its antisense sRNA ryeB (Fröhlich, 2012).	b4432
sdsR	ryeB, tpke79	Null	Null	Stationary phase sRNA, mutS regulator	The sdsR(ryeB) sRNA negatively regulates mutS mRNA stability, revealing a probably RpoS-dependent mechanism of ampicillin-induced mutagenesis (Gutierrez, 2013). sdsR(ryeB) was initially characterized in Salmonella as a regulator of ompD and named sdsR; E. coli does not have ompD; although sdsR is abundant in stationary phase in E. coli and is probably regulated by RpoS, the RpoS-dependence of sdsR(ryeB) has not yet been shown in E. coli (Fröhlich, 2012).	b4433
sgrS	ryaA	Null	Null	sRNA that destabilzes ptsG mRNA; regulated by sgrR	Null	b4577
isrC	IS102	Null	Null	Novel sRNA, function unknown, CP4-44; flu mRNA 5'UTR; putative prophage remnant	The 195 nt isrC sRNA is produced by premature termination of the 222 nt flu(agn43) mRNA 5' UTR; isrC may regulate csrD expression since isrC is complementary to csrD mRNA; the 3' end of isrC has been adjusted to match the 195 nt truncated flu(agn43) 5' UTR (Wallecha, 2014). The start site for isrC has been adjusted to match the precisely mapped start for the flu(agn43) mRNA (Waldron, 2002). isrC RNA was detected at a low level and predicted to be an sRNA (Chen, 2002). No function for the isrC sRNA has yet been experimentally determined and thus it is possible that isrC does not function as an sRNA and is just an attenuated 5' UTR for flu; iscR may be removed as a separate sRNA gene in the future.	b4435
sibA	QUAD1a, ryeC, tp11	Null	Null	Antisense sRNA regulator of toxic IbsA protein; in SIBa repeat	Null	b4436
sibB	QUAD1b, ryeD, tpe60	Null	Null	Antisense sRNA regulator of toxic IbsB protein; in SIBb repeat	Null	b4437
cyaR	ryeE	Null	Null	sRNA effector of ompX mRNA instability, cAMP-induced; hfq-dependent	Prophage remnant PR-X hybrid: the last 15 bp of cyaR are derived from P2-like prophage PR-X, downstream of the ogr gene. The cyaR transcript apparently terminates at the PR-X attL (attP'B') site. cyaR may be produced by PR-X associated events and may function as an attachment site for P2-like prophages.	b4438
ryfA	PAIR3b, tp1	Null	Null	Novel sRNA, function unknown	Null	b4440
glmY	sroF, tke1	Null	Null	sRNA activator of glmS mRNA, glmZ processing antagonist	YhbJ(RapZ) is an adaptor protein that recruits GlmZ to the catalytic domain of RNase E; GlmY is an anti-adaptor decoy sRNA that binds YhbJ(RapZ) competitively with GlmZ, protecting it from degradation (Göpel, 2013). GlmY facilitates a cleavage of the glmUS mRNA, upregulating GlmS synthesis, by antagonizing the probable YhbJ(RapZ)-dependent decay of the GlmZ antisense cleavage activator (Urban, 2008; Reichenbach, 2008). Increased GlmZ-Hfq leads to the cleavage of the glmUS mRNA at the glmU stop codon, upregulating GlmS synthesis; YhbJ(RapZ) negatively regulates glmZ (Kalamorz, 2007). A short form 148 nt GlmY(SroF) sRNA has 37 nt processed off the 3' end; the smaller GlmY predominates in rich medium, both are present in minimal medium (Vogel, 2003). RpoN regulon.	b4441
micA	psrA10, sraD	Null	Null	sRNA regulator of ompA, lamB, ompX and phoP, Hfq-dependent	Induced during stationary phase. RpoE regulon. Hfq-bound MicA antisense sRNA binds the RBS region of ompA mRNA, blocking translation and promoting mRNA degradation.	b4442
omrA	PAIR2a, psrA12, rygA, sraE, t59	Null	Null	sRNA downregulating OM proteins and curli; positively regulated by OmpR/EnvZ; binds Hfq	Hfq-dependent omrA and omrB sRNAs downregulate curli gene activator CsgD post-transcriptionally and repress curli formation (Holmqvist, 2010). omrA and omrB sRNAs may regulate outer membrane protein composition in response to environmental conditions. Overexpressed OmrA or OmrB sRNA negatively regulate OM proteins, e.g. CirA, FecA, FepA and OmpT. OmrB, and possibly OmrA, regulates gntP (Tjaden, 2006).	b4444
omrB	PAIR2b, rygB, t59	Null	Null	sRNA downregulating OM proteins and curli; positively regulated by OmpR/EnvZ; binds Hfq	Hfq-dependent omrA and omrB sRNAs downregulate curli gene activator CsgD post-transcriptionally and repress curli formation (Holmqvist, 2010). omrA and omrB sRNAs may regulate outer membrane protein composition in response to environmental conditions. Overexpressed OmrA or OmrB sRNA negatively regulate OM proteins, e.g. CirA, FecA, FepA and OmpT. OmrB, and possibly OmrA, regulates gntP (Tjaden, 2006).	b4445
sibC	QUAD1c, rygC, t27	Null	Null	Antisense sRNA regulator of toxic IbsC protein; in SIBc repeat	Null	b4446
sibD	C0730, IS156, QUAD1d, rygD, tp8	Null	Null	Antisense sRNA regulator of toxic IbsD protein; in SIBd repeat	A revision of the MG1655 genome sequence revealed a missing 375 nt fragment, lost by recombination between the duplicate (90% identical) sibD and sibE sRNA genes, excising one sRNA gene copy and the 229 nt intervening sequence. Thus the previous name QUAD1 repeats is a misnomer, as there are really five copies of this repeat family in MG1655, and so it has been changed to SIB repeats (Fozo, 2008).	b4447
psrO	p3, psrA15, sraG	Null	Null	Novel sRNA, function unknown	Null	b4449
arcZ	psrA16, ryhA, sraH	Null	Null	sRNA positive antisense regulator of rpoS; binds Hfq	ArcZ is processed to a 55 nt mature active form (3' fragment) that binds Hfq and rpoS mRNA and positively regulates rpoS translation; an 88 nt 5' ArcZ fragment also accumulates in low amounts (Soper, 2010; Mandin, 2010). The function of arcZ was originally characterized in Salmonella and the tpx and sdaA targets (also regulated by ArcA) have not been verified in E. coli (Papenfort, 2009). Although the precursor RNA can be seen in low amounts, the predominant form of ArcZ is a processed 3' fragment of ~50 nt that accumulates in stationary phase cells (Argaman, 2001). In Salmonella, ArcZ processing is rne-dependent and the ~50 nt mature ArcZ can suppress tpx and sdaC (Papenfort, 2009).	b4450
gadY	IS183	Null	Null	sRNA regulator of gadAB transcriptional activator GadX mRNA	gadY sRNA pairs with the 3' end of gadX mRNA to stabilize it. gadY also has two short forms: 90 and 59 nt. RpoS regulon. Found only in E. coli.	b4452
glmZ	k19, psrA20, ryiA, sraJ	Null	Null	sRNA antisense activator of glmS mRNA, Hfq-dependent	YhbJ(RapZ) is an adaptor protein that recruits GlmZ to the catalytic domain of RNase E; GlmY is an anti-adaptor decoy sRNA that binds YhbJ(RapZ) competitively with GlmZ, protecting it from degradation (Göpel, 2013). Increased GlmZ-Hfq leads to the cleavage of the glmUS mRNA at the glmU stop codon, upregulating GlmS synthesis; YhbJ(RapZ) negatively regulates glmZ (Kalamorz, 2007). The GlmY sRNA indirectly activates glmS mRNA by antagonizing the YhbJ(RapZ)-dependent GlmZ inactivating processing (Urban, 2007).	b4456
ryjA	sraL	Null	Null	Novel sRNA, function unknown	Null	b4459
istR	psr19, psrA19	Null	Null	sRNAs IstR-1 and IstR-2, tisB regulators	IstR-1 (75 bp) is initiated from an internal promoter; lstR-2 is lexA-regulated, possibly mitigating the lstR-1 antisense inhibition of residual TisB translation during the SOS response (Vogel, 2004). The antisense sRNA IstR binds to and blocks an upstream ribosome loading standby site required for translation initiation of TisB; ribosomes probably slide to the highly structured downstream TIR after loading; this results in RNase III cleavage of the active, processed +42 tisB mRNA to form an inactive +106 tisB mRNA (Darfeuille, 2007).	b4616
rydC	IS067	Null	Null	sRNA regulator of csgD and yejABEF	The sRNA rydC reduces expression of the biofilm and curli regulator CsgD (Bordeau, 2014). rydC regulates yejABEF expression; over-expression of rydC causes a thermosensitive growth phenotype on minimal glycerol, maltose, or ribose media (Antal, 2005). 	b4597
sibE	QUAD1e, rygE	Null	Null	Antisense sRNA regulator of toxic IbsE protein; in SIBe repeat	A revision of the MG1655 genome sequence revealed a missing 375 nt fragment, lost by recombination between the duplicate (90% identical) sibD and sibE sRNA genes, excising one sRNA gene copy and the 229 nt intervening sequence. Thus the previous name QUAD1 repeats is a misnomer, as there are really five copies of this repeat family in MG1655, and so the name has been changed to SIB repeats (Fozo, 2008).	b4611
rseX	IS96	Null	Null	sRNA regulating ompA and ompC translation, with Hfq	RseX was isolated as an rseP multi-copy suppressor due to its reduction of OmpC and OmpA.	b4603
ptwF'	None	Null	Null	thrW pseudogene, CP4-6 prophage attachment site	A 60 bp duplication flanks CP4-6: the last 49 bp of thrW and the 49 bp ptwF' tRNA pseudogene, plus 11 distal bp.	b4629
pauD'	None	Null	Null	argU pseudogene, DLP12 prophage attachment site	A 47 bp duplication flanks DLP12: the last 45 bp of argU and the 45 bp pauD' tRNA pseudogene, plus 2 distal bp. 	b4635
pawZ'	None	Null	Null	CPS-53 prophage attachment site attR, argW pseudogene	16 bp duplicate sequences, attL and attR, flank CPS-53: the last 15 bp of argW (plus 1) and the 15 bp pawZ' tRNA pseudogene fragment (plus 1).	b4643
psaA'	None	Null	Null	ssrA pseudogene, CP4-57 attachment site duplication; putative defective prophage	A 15 bp duplication flanks CP4-57: the last 15 bp of ssrA and the 14 bp psaA' tRNA pseudogene, plus 1 distal bp.	b4645
chiX	er13, micM, rybC, sroB	Null	Null	sRNA regulator of OM chitoporin ChiP(YbfM); also an antisense regulator for CitA(DpiB)	ChiX(MicM) silences chiP(ybfM) mRNA, blocking translation and causing the chiPQ(ybfMN) mRNA to be degraded (Rasmussen, 2009). Upregulation of a chb operon-encoded trap-mRNA (the chbBC intergenic region acting as an anti-antisense RNA) causes degradation of the micM sRNA, leading to induction of chiP(ybfM) mRNA translation (Overgaard, 2009). ChiX(MicM) has been independently characterized in Salmonella, and the Salmonella name chiX is used for the E. coli sRNA as well (Figueroa-Bossi, 2009). ChiX(RybC,MicM) regulates citAB(dpiBA) mRNA; citAB(dpiBA) mRNA may be another ChiX trap-mRNA (also called an RNA decoy) as well (Mandin, 2009).	b4585
sokA'	None	Null	Null	Pseudogene, antisense sRNA blocking mokA/hokA translation; the last 30/52 nt remain	Insertion of IS150 caused a 39 bp deletion relative to the intact hokA/sokA locus in E. coli C.	b4614
ohsC	ryfC	Null	Null	Antisense sRNA regulator of shoB toxin	The shoB mRNA is the now defunct RyfB sRNA.	b4608
ryfD	None	Null	Null	Novel sRNA, function unknown	Null	b4609
symR	ryjC	Null	Null	sRNA destabilizing divergent and overlapping symE mRNA	symR(ryjC) was identified by sequencing size-selected sRNA-derived clones (Kawano, 2005). A symR -10 promoter mutation prevents chromsomal symR transcription, increasing symE mRNA three-fold and SymE protein seven-fold as does anti-SymR RNA expressed in trans (Kawano, 2007). Endogenous SymR sRNA is 10-fold higher than symE mRNA and 40-fold plasmid-based overexpression of SymR results in a loss of symE mRNA (Kawano, 2007). 	b4625
ryjB	None	Null	Null	Novel sRNA, function unknown	Null	b4624
sroH	IS206	Null	Null	Novel sRNA, function unknown	Null	b4691
eyeA	I001	Null	Null	Novel sRNA, function unknown, CP4-6 prophage	The transcription start site, orientation, and length of eyeA(I001) has been determined experimentally (Saetrom, 2005).	b4690
mgrR	None	Null	Null	sRNA affecting sensitivity to antimicrobial peptides; regulated by PhoPQ and Mg(2+)	An mgrR deletion confers a 10-fold increase in Polymyxin B resistance, indicating a probable change in LPS (Moon, 2009). ygdQ and eptB are negatively regulated by the mgrR sRNA (Moon, 2009). The sRNA mgrR and the adjacent converging protein gene yneM are conserved and are also expressed in Salmonella (Sittka, 2008). MgrR was first observed as an sRNA by a signal on microarrays after Hfq precipitation (Zhang, 2003). The 5' end of mgrR sRNA was mapped by RACE; the 3' end is a predicted Rho-independent terminator (Moon, 2009).	b4698
fnrS	rydA	Null	Null	FNR-activated anaerobic sRNA; mediates negative FNR regulation; Hfq-dependent	FNR activates fnrS transcription anaerobically and then FnrS negatively regulates cydDC, metE, sodA, sodB and other targets, which are translationally repressed indirectly by FNR through FnrS in this manner; FnrS also activates at least one target gene (yhaO) (Boysen, 2010; Durand, 2010). FnrS was previously predicted to be an sRNA based on conservation, but no transcripts are made aerobically so no expression was detected (Wassarman, 2001). Deep sequencing of sRNAs from Salmonella identified the FnrS ortholog STnc580 (Sittka, 2008). The 5' end of FnrS was determined by primer extension and the 3' end is the last U of a predicted rho-independent terminator; the predicted 122 nt size of FnrS was confirmed by Northern blot (Boysen, 2010).	b4699
sokE	None	Null	Null	Antisense sRNA at remnant mokE/hokE locus	Although sokE and hokE are intact, the start of the regulatory peptide gene mokE is missing from this remnant hok/mok locus, so the mokE (and hence hokE) is not expressed and the frame cannot be determined to annotate a pseudogene.	b4700
sokX	None	Null	Null	Antisense sRNA, function unknown	SokX is homologous to the antisense regualtor sok sRNAs at hok loci, but there is no hok toxic peptide at this locus. It is either a remnant locus and hok has been deleted (and thus sokX is likely non-functional), or sokX has acquired an unknown stand-alone function (Kawano, 2005).	b4701
arrS	None	Null	Null	Antisense sRNA regulator of gadE and acid resistance; GadE-regulated	Overexpression of ArrS increases acid-resistance and GadE expression (Aiso, 2014). ArrS is encoded on the complementary strand of the gadE 5' UTR; arrS has gadE-dependent transcription in early stationary phase and acid-inducible expression in exponential growth (Aiso, 2011). 	b4704
agrA	None	Null	Null	Inactive antisense sRNA	DinQ is a 27 amino acid UV-inducible toxin that depolarizes the cell membrane, decreases ATP concentration, and affects nucleoid structure after UV exposure; DinQ and the agrB sRNA antitoxin constitute a novel type I-like toxin-antitoxin module that affects the cell response to UV-induced DNA damage; three lines of evidence demonstrate that the agrA sRNA antitoxin can neutralize the DinQ toxin: (1) an agrA deletion mutant is UV-sensitive, grows slowly, and is recessive, while the dinQ agrAB deletion strain is not UV-sensitive and grows normally (agrA single mutants have no phenotype, indicating that the agrA sRNA is inactive), (2) a clone with both agrA and dinQ does not display the UV-sensitivity caused by introducing a dinQ clone alone into wildtype cells, and (3) a dinQ clone cannot be introduced into an agrB mutant strain (Weel-Sneve, 2013). The TERM54 intergenic repeat with transcription termination activity corresponds to the agrA sRNA terminator (Blaisdell, 1993; Rudd, 1999).	b4712
agrB	None	Null	Null	Antisense sRNA antitoxin for the DinQ toxin	DinQ is a 27 amino acid UV-inducible toxin that depolarizes the cell membrane, decreases ATP concentration, and affects nucleoid structure after UV exposure; DinQ and the agrB sRNA antitoxin constitute a novel type I-like toxin-antitoxin module that affects the cell response to UV-induced DNA damage; three lines of evidence demonstrate that the agrA sRNA antitoxin can neutralize the DinQ toxin: (1) an agrA deletion mutant is UV-sensitive, grows slowly, and is recessive, while the dinQ agrAB deletion strain is not UV-sensitive and grows normally (agrA single mutants have no phenotype, indicating that the agrA sRNA is inactive), (2) a clone with both agrA and dinQ does not display the UV-sensitivity caused by introducing a dinQ clone alone into wildtype cells, and (3) a dinQ clone cannot be introduced into an agrB mutant strain (Weel-Sneve, 2013). The TERM55 intergenic repeat with transcription termination activity corresponds to the agrA sRNA terminator (Blaisdell, 1993; Rudd, 1999).	b4713
esrE	None	Null	Null	putative sRNA of unknown function	Earlier results identifying an essential sRNA esrE in the ubiJ(yigP) gene could not be reproduced in Salmonella or E. coli; no Salmonella esrE sRNA was detectable by Northern blots or 5' RACE; the ubiJ(yigP) gene is not essential in E. coli and can be deleted; the ubiJ(yigP) deletion strain forms small colonies aerobically and has a reduced growth yield in liquid medium; ubiJ(yigP) is required for ubiquinone but not menaquinone biosynthesis aerobically, but is not required for anaerobic ubiquinone production; the aerobic growth defects of an E. coli ubiJ(yigP) deletion can be complemented by wildtype ubiJ on a plasmid and by a codon-scrambled version of ubiJ that makes the same UbiJ protein sequence, indicating that the growth defect is due to UbiJ protein synthesis, not the esrE sRNA, in contrast to earlier results; a frameshifted version of ubiJ(yigP) on a plasmid failed to complement the growth defect; the C-terminal 50 codons of ubiJ(yigP) are sufficient for complementation of the growth defect and ubiquinone synthesis defect associated with aerobic growth of the ubiJ(yigP) deletion strain; the biochemical functional of UbiJ is unknown but the authors propose that UbiJ could serve as a carrier of the isoprenoid hydrophobic tail prior to the action of monooxygenases and methyltransferases (Aussel, 2013). The 5' and 3' ends of a putative esrE sRNA were mapped within the ubiJ(yigP) gene; the authors reported that the growth defect associated with a (ubiJ)yigP deletion could be complemented with a minimal esrE gene; the authors reported frameshifts do not disrupt the ability of an esrE clone to complement, indicating an RNA not protein product is responsible for the complementation, but this result was later refuted; the 3' end of esrE corresponds to the stop codon of yigP; there is no obvious Rho-independent terminator at the end of esrE (Chen, 2012).	b4707
ralA	rcbA	Null	Null	sRNA antitoxin for RalR toxin	RalA is the sRNA antitoxin for the RalR DNase toxin of the RalRA type I toxin-antitoxin pair; RalR may be involved in DnaA-overproduction-induced dsDNA breaks and the previous RcbA suppression effects may be due to the inhibition of the RalR DNAse due to RalA sRNA overexpression, not YdaC protein overexpression (Guo, 2014). YdaC is a putative protein encoded by a small ORF encoded on the opposite strand as the RalA sRNA and YdaC does appear to encode a conserved DUF1187 family protein of unknown function (Pfam PF06688); until it is determined whether or not RalA, and presumably RalR, are involved in the DnaA-induced dsDNA breaks, and whether or not the putative YdaC protein is involved, rbcA is changed back to ydaC and rbcA is added as a synonym to both ydaC and ralA.	b4714
insA1	None	IS1 repressor TnpA	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS1 transposase A	Null	b0022
insB1	None	IS1 transposase B	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS1 transposase B	Null	b0021
insC1	None	IS2 repressor TnpA	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS2 transposase A	Null	b0360
insD1	None	IS2 transposase TnpB	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS2 transposase B	Null	b0361
insE1	None	IS3 transposase A	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS3 transposase A	Null	b0298
insF1	None	IS3 transposase B	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS3 transposase B	Null	b0299
insG	None	IS4 transposase	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS4 transposase	Null	b4278
insH1	None	IS5 transposase and trans-activator	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS5 transposase	Null	b0259
insI1	None	IS30 transposase	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS30 transposase	The insI copy in IS30B encodes a C-terminal 57 aa pseudogene fragment.	b0256
insJ	None	IS150 transposase A	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS150 transposase A	Null	b3557
insK	dinS	IS150 transposase B	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS150 transposase B	An SOS box (dinS) was predicted within the insK ORF (De Henestrosa, 2000).	b3558
insL1	None	IS186 transposase	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS186 transposase	Null	b0016
insM'	None	pseudogene, IS600 transposase	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	Pseudogene, truncated IS600 transposase	The last 11 amino acids of InsM have been truncated by IS911.	b4561
insN'	insN1, insO, ORFAB	pseudogene, IS911 transposase A	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	Pseudogene reconstruction, fused IS911 transposase AB	The individual ORFA and ORFB proteins are also observed, but the fused ORFAB protein is the active transposase. Intact alleles of ORFAB include Q6Q6S9 and Q8GJ19. insN is interrupted by the insertion of IS30A at codon 86, also the site of translation frameshifting in the intact ORFAB. Two aminos acids are deleted at the insertion site (G87, Y88), represented by XX. The C-terminus is truncated at the site of ISY insertion, leaving 229 N-terminal residues. The annotated start site was verified for a wildtype IS911.	b4587
insO'	insN2, ORFAB, yjhW	pseudogene, IS911 transposase B	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	Pseudogene reconstruction, fused IS911 transposase AB	The individual ORFA and ORFB proteins are also observed, but the fused ORFAB protein is the active transposase. insO is interrupted by the insertion of IS30D at codon 86, also the site of translation frameshifting in the intact ORFAB. 43 aminos acids are deleted at the insertion site, represented by Xs. A frameshift mutation caused by a one base pair deletion in codon 285 was hypothetically corrected by translating codon 285 as X instead of the H that was probably there prior to the one base pair deletion event; frame is preserved in the gene reconstruction by repeating the nucleotide prior to the deleted nucleotide. The annotated start site was verified for a wildtype IS911. The last seven residues of ORFB are polymorphic; the C-terminal residues of this reconstructed ORFAB from K-12 matches the C-terminus of ORFB from UniProtKB M9F4Q3. Fused versions of ORFAB include UniProtKB Q6Q6S9 and Q8GJ19, but with different C-terminal residues than K-12.	b4623
rplU	None	50S ribosomal subunit protein L21	Structural component; Ribosomal proteins - synthesis, modification	50S ribosomal subunit protein L21	Null	b3186
rpmA	rpz	50S ribosomal subunit protein L27	Structural component; Ribosomal proteins - synthesis, modification	50S ribosomal subunit protein L27	Null	b3185
acpP	None	acyl carrier protein (ACP)	Carrier; Fatty acid and phosphatidic acid biosynthesis	Acyl carrier protein ACP	Ser36 is phosphopantethylated by AcpS. HT_Cmplx33_Cyt: AcpP+PurB+SecA.	b1094
rmf	None	ribosome modulation factor	Factor; Ribosomes - maturation and modification	Ribosome Modulation Factor RMF; binds 70S ribosome dimers to form 100S; occurs in stationary phase	The rmf promoter region binds ArcA (Federowicz, 2014).	b0953
eutB	None	ethanolamine ammonia-lyase, large subunit, heavy chain	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Amines	Ethanolamine ammonia lyase, large subunit, adenosylcobalamine-dependent; concerted induction requires both B12 and ethanolamine; heterodimeric	EutBC deaminates amino-alcohols (ethanolamine) to oxo compounds (acetaldehyde) and ammonia. eutA and eutB are separated by the Eut/CPZ-55 putative prophage remnant.	b2441
eutC	None	ethanolamine ammonia-lyase, small subunit (light chain)	Enzyme; Degradation of small molecules: Amines	Ethanolamine ammonia lyase, small subunit, adenosylcobalamine-dependent; concerted induction requires both B12 and ethanolamine; heterodimeric	EutBC deaminates amino-alcohols (ethanolamine) to oxo compounds (acetaldehyde) and ammonia.	b2440
cybC'	None	pseudogene, truncated cytochrome b562	Null	Pseudogene, N-terminal fragment, cytochrome b562	This deletion version of cybC lacks the first 7 codons (for MRKSLLA) and is not expressed in MG1655. An intact cybC is in E. coli B strains (Genbank S74736). Intact CybC has a 22 aa type I signal peptide, confirmed by N-terminal sequencing (Itagaki, 1968).	b4236
gadA	gadS	glutamate decarboxylase A, PLP-dependent	Enzyme; Central intermediary metabolism: Pool, multipurpose conversions	Glutamate decarboxylase A	RpoS regulon. EvgAS regulon. H-NS repressed. Induced by acid shock and salt stress. 	b3517
frmA	adhC	alcohol dehydrogenase class III; glutathione-dependent formaldehyde dehydrogenase	Enzyme; Energy metabolism, carbon: Fermentation	Glutathione-dependent formaldehyde dehydrogenase	The frmRAB operon is negatively regulated by frmR, is induced by formaldehyde, and probably degrades formaldehyde. Formaldehyde spontaneously forms S-hydroxymethylglutathione, which FrmA then converts to S-formylglutathione.	b0356
folP	dhpS	7,8-dihydropteroate synthase	Enzyme; Biosynthesis of cofactors, carriers: Folic acid	Dihydropteroate synthase	folP insertion mutants grow in LB enriched with added folate (Gerdes, 2003). A folP deletion mutant grows very poorly in a rich medium unsupplemented by folate, although it is unclear if LB or 2X YT medium was used (Fermer, 1997). The folP mutants in the Keio collection have been shown to harbor an intact copy of folP in addition to the deletion allele (Yamamoto, 2009). The merodiploid folP duplication in the Keio mutants strains probably compensates for the lack of supplemental folate in the LB rich medium utilized to construct the folP mutants.	b3177
insB2	None	IS1 transposase B	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS1 transposase B	Null	b0264
insA2	None	IS1 repressor TnpA	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS1 transposase A	Null	b0265
insB3	None	IS1 transposase B	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS1 transposase B	Null	b0274
insA3	None	IS1 repressor TnpA	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS1 transposase A	Null	b0275
insF2	None	IS3 transposase B	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS3 transposase B	Null	b0372
insE2	None	IS3 transposase A	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS3 transposase A	Null	b0373
insE3	None	IS3 transposase A	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS3 transposase A	Null	b0540
insF3	None	IS3 transposase B	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS3 transposase B	Null	b0541
insH2	None	IS5 transposase and trans-activator	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS5 transposase	Null	b0552
insL2	None	IS186 transposase	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS186 transposase	Null	b0582
insH4	None	IS5 transposase and trans-activator	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS5 transposase	Null	b0656
insA4	None	IS1 repressor TnpA	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS1 transposase A	Null	b4516
insB4	None	IS1 transposase B	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS1 transposase B	Null	b0988
insF4	None	IS3 transposase B	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS3 transposase B	Null	b1026
insE4	None	IS3 transposase A	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS3 transposase A	Null	b1027
insH6	None	IS5 transposase and trans-activator	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS5 transposase	Null	b1331
insH25	None	IS5 transposase and trans-activator, possibly defective	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS5 transposase, possibly defective	InsH25 in IS5Y (inserted into the Rac prophage) has numerous amino acid differences relative to the other insH genes and may a be defective or specialized transposase.	b1370
insD4	None	IS2 transposase TnpB	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS2 transposase B	Null	b1402
insC4	None	IS2 repressor TnpA	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS2 transposase A	Null	b1403
insI3	None	IS30 transposase	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS30 transposase	Null	b1404
insB8	None	IS1 transposase B	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS1 transposase B	Null	b1893
insA8	None	IS1 repressor TnpA	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS1 transposase A	IS1 is inserted in 8 locations in MG1655(Seq), designated IS1ABCDEFHI.	b1894
insH8	None	IS5 transposase and trans-activator	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS5 transposase	Null	b1994
insD6	None	IS2 transposase TnpB	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS2 transposase B	Null	b1996
insC6	None	IS2 repressor TnpA	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS2 transposase A	Null	b1997
insH9	None	IS5 transposase and trans-activator	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS5 transposase	IS5I was added to MG1655 just before it was sequenced and is specific to MG1655(Seq) (Freddolini, 2011).	b2030
insE5	None	IS3 transposase A	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS3 transposase A	Null	b2088
insF5	None	IS3 transposase B	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS3 transposase B	Null	b2089
insH11	None	IS5 transposase and trans-activator	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS5 transposase	Null	b2192
insL3	None	IS186 transposase	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS186 transposase	Null	b2394
insD8	None	IS2 transposase TnpB	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS2 transposase B	Null	b2860
insC8	None	IS2 repressor TnpA	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS2 transposase A	Null	b2861
insH15	None	IS5 transposase and trans-activator	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS5 transposase	Null	b2982
insC9	None	IS2 repressor TnpA	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS2 transposase A	Null	b3044
insD9	None	IS2 transposase TnpB	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS2 transposase B	Null	b3045
insH18	None	IS5 transposase and trans-activator	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS5 transposase	Null	b3218
insA5	None	IS1 repressor TnpA	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS1 transposase A	Null	b3444
insB5	None	IS1 transposase B	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS1 transposase B	Null	b3445
insH20	None	IS5 transposase and trans-activator	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS5 transposase	Null	b3505
insC11	None	IS2 repressor TnpA	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS2 transposase A	Null	b4272
insD11	None	IS2 transposase TnpB	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS2 transposase B	Null	b4273
insI4	None	IS30 transposase	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS30 transposase	Null	b4284
insA6	None	IS1 repressor TnpA	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS1 transposase A	Null	b4294
insB6'	None	pseudogene, IS1 transposase B	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	Pseudogene reconstruction, IS1 transposase B	An in-frame TAG stop at codon 98, normally encoding a Trp residue, has been translated as an X in this InsB6' pseudogene reconstruction; this reconstructed InsB6' has 16 amino acid differences relative to InsB1, InsB5, InsB8, and InsB9.	b4576
insI2'	None	IS30 transposase	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS30 transposase, pseudogene	insI2' in IS30B encodes a C-terminal 57 aa pseudogene fragment missing the first 326 amino acids.	b4708
insD5'	None	IS2 transposase TnpB	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS2 transposase B, pseudogene	IS2E' is a partial IS2 sequence missing insC5 and codons 1-71 of insD5'.	b1578
insA9	None	IS1 transposase A	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS1 transposase A	IS1I in crl was added to MG1655 just prior to sequencing and is specific to MG1655(Seq) (Freddolino, 2011).	b4709
insB9	None	IS1 transposase B	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS1 transposase B	IS1I in crl was added to MG1655 just prior to sequencing and is specific to MG1655(Seq) (Freddolino, 2011).	b4710
insH21	None	IS5 transposase and trans-activator	IS, phage, Tn; Transposon-related functions; extrachromosomal; transposon related	IS5 transposase	IS5U was inserted upstream of oppA in MG1655 just before the genome was sequenced and is specific to MG1655(Seq) (Freddolino, 2011).	b4711
